The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes
(#15 in our series by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle)
Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.
header without written permission.
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.
**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**
*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****
Title: The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes
Author: Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
Edition: 12
Language: English
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***
(Additional editing by Jose Menendez)
BY
CONTENTS
I.	A Scandal in Bohemia
II.	The Red-Headed League
III.	A Case of Identity
IV.	The Boscombe Valley Mystery
V.	The Five Orange Pips
VII.	The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle
IX.	The Adventure of the Engineer's Thumb
ADVENTURE  I.  A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA
I.
I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us away from each other. My own complete happiness, and the home-centred interests which rise up around the man who first finds himself master of his own establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his whole Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried among his old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine and ambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of his own keen nature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the study of crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powers of observation in following out those clues, and clearing up those mysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police. From time to time I heard some vague account of his doings: of his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his clearing up of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee, and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so delicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland. Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely shared with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my former friend and companion.
One night--it was on the twentieth of March, 1888--I was returning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civil practice), when my way led me through Baker Street. As I passed the well-remembered door, which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing, and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him. To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their own story. He was at work again. He had risen out of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in part my own.
His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think, to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he waved me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.
"Wedlock suits you," he remarked. "I think, Watson, that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."
"Seven!" I answered.
"Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I fancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell me that you intended to go into harness."
"Then, how do you know?"
"I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and careless servant girl?"
"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. You would certainly have been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as I have changed my clothes I can't imagine how you deduce it. As to Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but there, again, I fail to see how you work it out."
"It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey. As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession."
I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his process of deduction. "When I hear you give your reasons," I remarked, "the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain your process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours."
"Frequently."
"How often?"
"Well, some hundreds of times."
"Then how many are there?"
"How many? I don't know."
"Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is just my point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I have both seen and observed. By the way, since you are interested in these little problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this." He threw over a sheet of thick, pink-tinted notepaper which had been lying open upon the table. "It came by the last post," said he. "Read it aloud."
The note was undated, and without either signature or address.
"This is indeed a mystery," I remarked. "What do you imagine that it means?"
"I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorise before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you deduce from it?"
"Peculiar--that is the very word," said Holmes. "It is not an English paper at all. Hold it up to the light."
I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and a large "G" with a small "t" woven into the texture of the paper.
"What do you make of that?" asked Holmes.
"Not at all. The 'G' with the small 't' stands for 'Gesellschaft,' which is the German for 'Company.' It is a customary contraction like our 'Co.' 'P,' of course, stands for 'Papier.' Now for the 'Eg.' Let us glance at our Continental Gazetteer." He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves. "Eglow, Eglonitz--here we are, Egria. It is in a German-speaking country--in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad. 'Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerous glass-factories and paper-mills.' Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make of that?" His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette.
"Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you note the peculiar construction of the sentence--'This account of you we have from all quarters received.' A Frenchman or Russian could not have written that. It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs. It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this German who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask to showing his face. And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts."
As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and grating wheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the bell. Holmes whistled.
"A pair, by the sound," said he. "Yes," he continued, glancing out of the window. "A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A hundred and fifty guineas apiece. There's money in this case, Watson, if there is nothing else."
"I think that I had better go, Holmes."
"You had my note?" he asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly marked German accent. "I told you that I would call." He looked from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.
"You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. I understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour and discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extreme importance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with you alone."
I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back into my chair. "It is both, or none," said he. "You may say before this gentleman anything which you may say to me."
The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. "Then I must begin," said he, "by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the end of that time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is not too much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence upon European history."
"And I."
"I was aware of it," said Holmes dryly.
"The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has to be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal and seriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe. To speak plainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein, hereditary kings of Bohemia."
Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid, lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him as the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe. Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic client.
"The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known adventuress, Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you."
"Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor," murmured Holmes without opening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketing all paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it was difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnish information. In this case I found her biography sandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander who had written a monograph upon the deep-sea fishes.
"None."
"None."
"Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person should produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she to prove their authenticity?"
"There is the writing."
"Stolen."
"My own seal."
"My photograph."
"Bought."
"I was mad--insane."
"I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now."
"We have tried and failed."
"Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought."
"Stolen, then."
"Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her house. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she has been waylaid. There has been no result."
"No sign of it?"
"But how?"
"I am about to be married."
"So I have heard."
"To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the King of Scandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family. She is herself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my conduct would bring the matter to an end."
"I am sure."
"Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the betrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday."
"Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn. "That is very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look into just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for the present?"
"Certainly. You will find me at the Langham under the name of the Count Von Kramm."
"Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."
"Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety."
"Then, as to money?"
"Absolutely?"
"I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom to have that photograph."
The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak and laid it on the table.
"There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes," he said.
Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and handed it to him.
"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John's Wood."
Holmes took a note of it. "One other question," said he. "Was the photograph a cabinet?"
"It was."
"Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have some good news for you. And good-night, Watson," he added, as the wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. "If you will be good enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three o'clock I should like to chat this little matter over with you."
At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not yet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the house shortly after eight o'clock in the morning. I sat down beside the fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long he might be. I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, though it was surrounded by none of the grim and strange features which were associated with the two crimes which I have already recorded, still, the nature of the case and the exalted station of his client gave it a character of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of the investigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in his masterly grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, which made it a pleasure to me to study his system of work, and to follow the quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the most inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable success that the very possibility of his failing had ceased to enter into my head.
It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room. Accustomed as I was to my friend's amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it was indeed he. With a nod he vanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old. Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes.
"I can't imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits, and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler."
"Oh, she has turned all the men's heads down in that part. She is the daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet. So say the Serpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts, drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for dinner. Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings. Has only one male visitor, but a good deal of him. He is dark, handsome, and dashing, never calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is a Mr. Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple. See the advantages of a cabman as a confidant. They had driven him home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews, and knew all about him. When I had listened to all they had to tell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge once more, and to think over my plan of campaign.
"I am following you closely," I answered.
"I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab drove up to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a remarkably handsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustached--evidently the man of whom I had heard. He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the cabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door with the air of a man who was thoroughly at home.
" 'The Church of St. Monica, John,' she cried, 'and half a sovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes.'
"This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancing whether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her landau when a cab came through the street. The driver looked twice at such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could object. 'The Church of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes.' It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of course it was clear enough what was in the wind.
"My cabby drove fast. I don't think I ever drove faster, but the others were there before us. The cab and the landau with their steaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived. I paid the man and hurried into the church. There was not a soul there save the two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be expostulating with them. They were all three standing in a knot in front of the altar. I lounged up the side aisle like any other idler who has dropped into a church. Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at the altar faced round to me, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards me.
" 'Thank God,' he cried. 'You'll do. Come! Come!'
" 'What then?' I asked.
"I was half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I was I found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, and vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assisting in the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton, bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentleman thanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the clergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterous position in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the thought of it that started me laughing just now. It seems that there had been some informality about their license, that the clergyman absolutely refused to marry them without a witness of some sort, and that my lucky appearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally out into the streets in search of a best man. The bride gave me a sovereign, and I mean to wear it on my watch chain in memory of the occasion."
"This is a very unexpected turn of affairs," said I; "and what then?"
"Some cold beef and a glass of beer," he answered, ringing the bell. "I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier still this evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want your co-operation."
"Not in the least."
"Nor running a chance of arrest?"
"Oh, the cause is excellent!"
"But what is it you wish?"
"When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to you. Now," he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that our landlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, for I have not much time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the scene of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her."
"You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to occur. There is only one point on which I must insist. You must not interfere, come what may. You understand?"
"I am to be neutral?"
"To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some small unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyed into the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-room window will open. You are to station yourself close to that open window."
"Yes."
"Yes."
"And when I raise my hand--so--you will throw into the room what I give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire. You quite follow me?"
"Entirely."
"Precisely."
"That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I prepare for the new role I have to play."
It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in Serpentine Avenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the coming of its occupant. The house was just such as I had pictured it from Sherlock Holmes' succinct description, but the locality appeared to be less private than I expected. On the contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated. There was a group of shabbily dressed men smoking and laughing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a nurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging up and down with cigars in their mouths.
"But it has twice been burgled."
"But how will you look?"
"I will not look."
"What then?"
"I will get her to show me."
"But she will refuse."
"She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is her carriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter."
"He is dead," cried several voices.
"He's a brave fellow," said a woman. "They would have had the lady's purse and watch if it hadn't been for him. They were a gang, and a rough one, too. Ah, he's breathing now."
"He can't lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?"
"Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable sofa. This way, please!"
Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man who is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window. At the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossed my rocket into the room with a cry of "Fire!" The word was no sooner out of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed and ill--gentlemen, ostlers, and servant maids--joined in a general shriek of "Fire!" Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room and out at the open window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a moment later the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that it was a false alarm. Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar. He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we had turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the Edgeware Road.
"You have the photograph?"
"And how did you find out?"
"I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing. "The matter was perfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the street was an accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening."
"I guessed as much."
"Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the palm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to my face, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick."
"That also I could fathom."
"Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else could she do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very room which I suspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was determined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air, they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance."
"And now?" I asked.
"Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the King to-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. It might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his own hands."
"And when will you call?"
"At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have a clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean a complete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the King without delay."
We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He was searching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:
"Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes."
"I've heard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down the dimly lit street. "Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been."
III.
"You have really got it!" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by either shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.
"Not yet."
"But you have hopes?"
"Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone."
"We must have a cab."
"Then that will simplify matters." We descended and started off once more for Briony Lodge.
"Married! When?"
"Yesterday."
"But to whom?"
"To an English lawyer named Norton."
"But she could not love him."
"I am in hopes that she does."
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?" said she.
"Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She left this morning with her husband by the 5:15 train from Charing Cross for the Continent."
"What!" Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and surprise. "Do you mean that she has left England?"
"We shall see." He pushed past the servant and rushed into the drawing-room, followed by the King and myself. The furniture was scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her flight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress, the letter was superscribed to "Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for." My friend tore it open, and we all three read it together. It was dated at midnight of the preceding night and ran in this way:
"Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I was really an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes. Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and started for the Temple to see my husband.
"We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by so formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when you call to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace. I love and am loved by a better man than he. The King may do what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged. I keep it only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a weapon which will always secure me from any steps which he might take in the future. I leave a photograph which he might care to possess; and I remain, dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
"Very truly yours,              
"What a woman--oh, what a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when we had all three read this epistle. "Did I not tell you how quick and resolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is it not a pity that she was not on my level?"
"From what I have seen of the lady, she seems, indeed, to be on a very different level to your Majesty," said Holmes coldly. "I am sorry that I have not been able to bring your Majesty's business to a more successful conclusion."
"On the contrary, my dear sir," cried the King; "nothing could be more successful. I know that her word is inviolate. The photograph is now as safe as if it were in the fire."
"I am glad to hear your Majesty say so."
"Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly," said Holmes.
"You have but to name it."
The King stared at him in amazement.
"Irene's photograph!" he cried. "Certainly, if you wish it."
ADVENTURE  II.  THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE
"You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson," he said cordially.
"Then I can wait in the next room."
"Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he will be of the utmost use to me in yours also."
"You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view, for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning, and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singular which I have listened to for some time. You have heard me remark that the strangest and most unique things are very often connected not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, where there is room for doubt whether any positive crime has been committed. As far as I have heard, it is impossible for me to say whether the present case is an instance of crime or not, but the course of events is certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to. Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommence your narrative. I ask you not merely because my friend Dr. Watson has not heard the opening part but also because the peculiar nature of the story makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your lips. As a rule, when I have heard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to my memory. In the present instance I am forced to admit that the facts are, to the best of my belief, unique."
I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore every mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey shepherd's check trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit of metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him. Altogether, look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man save his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin and discontent upon his features.
Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook his head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances. "Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some time done manual labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, and that he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce nothing else."
"How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?" he asked. "How did you know, for example, that I did manual labour. It's as true as gospel, for I began as a ship's carpenter."
"Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger than your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more developed."
"Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"
"Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?"
"I begin to think, Watson," said Holmes, "that I make a mistake in explaining. 'Omne ignotum pro magnifico,' you know, and my poor little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am so candid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?"
"Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red finger planted halfway down the column. "Here it is. This is what began it all. You just read it for yourself, sir."
"TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of the late Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U. S. A., there is now another vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a salary of $4 a week for purely nominal services. All red-headed men who are sound in body and mind and above the age of twenty-one years, are eligible. Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o'clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope's Court, Fleet Street."
Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in high spirits. "It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?" said he. "And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all about yourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement had upon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paper and the date."
"Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?"
"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a small pawnbroker's business at Coburg Square, near the City. It's not a very large affair, and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come for half wages so as to learn the business."
"What is the name of this obliging youth?" asked Sherlock Holmes.
"His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth, either. It's hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes; and I know very well that he could better himself and earn twice what I am able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his head?"
"Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. Wilson. "Never was such a fellow for photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought to be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault, but on the whole he's a good worker. There's no vice in him."
"The first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding, he came down into the office just this day eight weeks, with this very paper in his hand, and he says:
" 'Why,' says he, 'here's another vacancy on the League of the Red-headed Men. It's worth quite a little fortune to any man who gets it, and I understand that there are more vacancies than there are men, so that the trustees are at their wits' end what to do with the money. If my hair would only change colour, here's a nice little crib all ready for me to step into.'
" 'Why, what is it, then?' I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a very stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my having to go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot over the door-mat. In that way I didn't know much of what was going on outside, and I was always glad of a bit of news.
" 'Never.'
" 'Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of the vacancies.'
" 'Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight, and it need not interfere very much with one's other occupations.'
"Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, for the business has not been over good for some years, and an extra couple of hundred would have been very handy.
" 'Tell me all about it,' said I.
" 'Well,' said he, showing me the advertisement, 'you can see for yourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the address where you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, the League was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was very peculiar in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he had a great sympathy for all red-headed men; so, when he died, it was found that he had left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees, with instructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths to men whose hair is of that colour. From all I hear it is splendid pay and very little to do.'
"There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs and a deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was even redder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he came up, and then he always managed to find some fault in them which would disqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a very easy matter, after all. However, when our turn came the little man was much more favourable to me than to any of the others, and he closed the door as we entered, so that he might have a private word with us.
" 'And he is admirably suited for it,' the other answered. 'He has every requirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so fine.' He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he plunged forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.
" 'It would be injustice to hesitate,' said he. 'You will, however, I am sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.' With that he seized my hair in both his hands, and tugged until I yelled with the pain. 'There is water in your eyes,' said he as he released me. 'I perceive that all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, for we have twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales of cobbler's wax which would disgust you with human nature.' He stepped over to the window and shouted through it at the top of his voice that the vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below, and the folk all trooped away in different directions until there was not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of the manager.
" 'My name,' said he, 'is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of the pensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you a married man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?'
"I answered that I had not.
" 'Dear me!' he said gravely, 'that is very serious indeed! I am sorry to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propagation and spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It is exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.'
" 'In the case of another,' said he, 'the objection might be fatal, but we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a head of hair as yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?'
" 'That would suit me very well,' said I. 'And the pay?'
" 'And the work?'
" 'What do you call purely nominal?'
" 'Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the building, the whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever. The will is very clear upon that point. You don't comply with the conditions if you budge from the office during that time.'
" 'It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,' said I.
" 'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. Duncan Ross; 'neither sickness nor business nor anything else. There you must stay, or you lose your billet.'
" 'And the work?'
" 'Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you once more on the important position which you have been fortunate enough to gain.' He bowed me out of the room and I went home with my assistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own good fortune.
"Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in low spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affair must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be I could not imagine. It seemed altogether past belief that anyone could make such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for doing anything so simple as copying out the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Vincent Spaulding did what he could to cheer me up, but by bedtime I had reasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the morning I determined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of ink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, I started off for Pope's Court.
"Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots and Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with diligence that I might get on to the B's before very long. It cost me something in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my writings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end."
"To an end?"
IS
"No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which he had half risen. "I really wouldn't miss your case for the world. It is most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did you take when you found the card upon the door?"
"I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called at the offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it. Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant living on the ground floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become of the Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any such body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that the name was new to him.
" 'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No. 4.'
" 'What, the red-headed man?'
" 'Yes.'
" 'Where could I find him?'
"I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard of either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross."
"And what did you do then?" asked Holmes.
"I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of my assistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say that if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough, Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice to poor folk who were in need of it, I came right away to you."
"Grave enough!" said Mr. Jabez Wilson. "Why, I have lost four pound a week."
"In answer to an advertisement."
"No, I had a dozen."
"Because he was handy and would come cheap."
"What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"
Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought as much," said he. "Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced for earrings?"
"Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was a lad."
"Hum!" said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. "He is still with you?"
"Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him."
"Nothing to complain of, sir. There's never very much to do of a morning."
"I make nothing of it," I answered frankly. "It is a most mysterious business."
"As a rule," said Holmes, "the more bizarre a thing is the less mysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless crimes which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter."
"What are you going to do, then?" I asked.
"Sarasate plays at the St. James's Hall this afternoon," he remarked. "What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a few hours?"
"Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first, and we can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good deal of German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste than Italian or French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Come along!"
"Thank you," said Holmes, "I only wished to ask you how you would go from here to the Strand."
"Third right, fourth left," answered the assistant promptly, closing the door.
"Smart fellow, that," observed Holmes as we walked away. "He is, in my judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I am not sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something of him before."
"Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts for a good deal in this mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquired your way merely in order that you might see him."
"And what did you see?"
"Why did you beat the pavement?"
"My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We are spies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square. Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it."
The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to it as the front of a picture does to the back. It was one of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to the north and west. The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowing in a double tide inward and outward, while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately business premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant square which we had just quitted.
"Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing along the line, "I should like just to remember the order of the houses here. It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London. There is Mortimer's, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, the Coburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Restaurant, and McFarlane's carriage-building depot. That carries us right on to the other block. And now, Doctor, we've done our work, so it's time we had some play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are no red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums."
My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while his gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, as it was possible to conceive. In his singular character the dual nature alternately asserted itself, and his extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have often thought, the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood which occasionally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him from extreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was never so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been lounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his black-letter editions. Then it was that the lust of the chase would suddenly come upon him, and that his brilliant reasoning power would rise to the level of intuition, until those who were unacquainted with his methods would look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that of other mortals. When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St. James's Hall I felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set himself to hunt down.
"You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor," he remarked as we emerged.
"And I have some business to do which will take some hours. This business at Coburg Square is serious."
"At what time?"
"Ten will be early enough."
"Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger, so kindly put your army revolver in your pocket." He waved his hand, turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the crowd.
It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my way across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Two hansoms were standing at the door, and as I entered the passage I heard the sound of voices from above. On entering his room, I found Holmes in animated conversation with two men, one of whom I recognised as Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat.
"We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see," said Jones in his consequential way. "Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down."
"I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase," observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.
"You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir," said the police agent loftily. "He has his own little methods, which are, if he won't mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical and fantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much to say that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the official force."
"John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He's a young man, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I would rather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He's a remarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning as his fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never know where to find the man himself. He'll crack a crib in Scotland one week, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next. I've been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him yet."
"I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night. I've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, however, and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom, Watson and I will follow in the second."
We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had found ourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following the guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passage and through a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was opened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to light a lantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage, and so, after opening a third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which was piled all round with crates and massive boxes.
"Nor from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon the flags which lined the floor. "Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!" he remarked, looking up in surprise.
The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a very injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his knees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began to examine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again and put his glass in his pocket.
"We have at least an hour before us," he remarked, "for they can hardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed. Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work the longer time they will have for their escape. We are at present, Doctor--as no doubt you have divined--in the cellar of the City branch of one of the principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of directors, and he will explain to you that there are reasons why the more daring criminals of London should take a considerable interest in this cellar at present."
"It is our French gold," whispered the director. "We have had several warnings that an attempt might be made upon it."
"Your French gold?"
"Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources and borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France. It has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack the money, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil. Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually kept in a single branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon the subject."
"I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I thought that, as we were a partie carree, you might have your rubber after all. But I see that the enemy's preparations have gone so far that we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we must choose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall take them at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are careful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If they fire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down."
I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behind which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of his lantern and left us in pitch darkness--such an absolute darkness as I have never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remained to assure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at a moment's notice. To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of the vault.
"I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door."
At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then it lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then, without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared, a white, almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre of the little area of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing fingers, protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark which marked a chink between the stones.
"It's no use, John Clay," said Holmes blandly. "You have no chance at all."
"So I see," the other answered with the utmost coolness. "I fancy that my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails."
"Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I must compliment you."
"I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands," remarked our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists. "You may not be aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also, when you address me always to say 'sir' and 'please.' "
"All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would you please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry your Highness to the police-station?"
"That is better," said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow to the three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of the detective.
"I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr. John Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense over this matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I am amply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways unique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League."
"But how could you guess what the motive was?"
"Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a mere vulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man's business was a small one, and there was nothing in his house which could account for such elaborate preparations, and such an expenditure as they were at. It must, then, be something out of the house. What could it be? I thought of the assistant's fondness for photography, and his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar! There was the end of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this mysterious assistant and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and most daring criminals in London. He was doing something in the cellar--something which took many hours a day for months on end. What could it be, once more? I could think of nothing save that he was running a tunnel to some other building.
"So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I was ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. It was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistant answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. His knees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours of burrowing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. I walked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on our friend's premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When you drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have seen."
"Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that they cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence--in other words, that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that they should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might be removed. Saturday would suit them better than any other day, as it would give them two days for their escape. For all these reasons I expected them to come to-night."
"You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeigned admiration. "It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true."
He shrugged his shoulders. "Well, perhaps, after all, it is of some little use," he remarked. " 'L'homme c'est rien--l'oeuvre c'est tout,' as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand."
ADVENTURE  III.  A CASE OF IDENTITY
"And yet I am not convinced of it," I answered. "The cases which come to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough. We have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither fascinating nor artistic."
"A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic effect," remarked Holmes. "This is wanting in the police report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain the vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there is nothing so unnatural as the commonplace."
He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the centre of the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon it.
"Ah," said he, "I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers."
"And the ring?" I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which sparkled upon his finger.
"It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in which I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my little problems."
"And have you any on hand just now?" I asked with interest.
He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street. Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite there stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a large curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear. From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp clang of the bell.
"I have seen those symptoms before," said Holmes, throwing his cigarette into the fire. "Oscillation upon the pavement always means an affaire de coeur. She would like advice, but is not sure that the matter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we may discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire. Here we may take it that there is a love matter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person to resolve our doubts."
As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons entered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.
"I did at first," she answered, "but now I know where the letters are without looking." Then, suddenly realising the full purport of his words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear and astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. "You've heard about me, Mr. Holmes," she cried, "else how could you know all that?"
"Never mind," said Holmes, laughing; "it is my business to know things. Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook. If not, why should you come to consult me?"
"I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whose husband you found so easy when the police and everyone had given him up for dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I'm not rich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besides the little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?" asked Sherlock Holmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to the ceiling.
Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of Miss Mary Sutherland. "Yes, I did bang out of the house," she said, "for it made me angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank--that is, my father--took it all. He would not go to the police, and he would not go to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on saying that there was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just on with my things and came right away to you."
"Your father," said Holmes, "your stepfather, surely, since the name is different."
"And your mother is alive?"
"Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn't best pleased, Mr. Holmes, when she married again so soon after father's death, and a man who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself. Father was a plumber in the Tottenham Court Road, and he left a tidy business behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; but when Mr. Windibank came he made her sell the business, for he was very superior, being a traveller in wines. They got $4700 for the goodwill and interest, which wasn't near as much as father could have got if he had been alive."
"Your own little income," he asked, "does it come out of the business?"
"You interest me extremely," said Holmes. "And since you draw so large a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain, you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself in every way. I believe that a single lady can get on very nicely upon an income of about $60."
"I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understand that as long as I live at home I don't wish to be a burden to them, and so they have the use of the money just while I am staying with them. Of course, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draws my interest every quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can do pretty well with what I earn at typewriting. It brings me twopence a sheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day."
"I suppose," said Holmes, "that when Mr. Windibank came back from France he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball."
"Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, and shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to a woman, for she would have her way."
"Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if we had got home all safe, and after that we met him--that is to say, Mr. Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came back again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any more."
"No?"
"Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?"
"Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after the first walk that we took. Hosmer--Mr. Angel--was a cashier in an office in Leadenhall Street--and--"
"He slept on the premises."
"To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till called for. He said that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by all the other clerks about having letters from a lady, so I offered to typewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn't have that, for he said that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when they were typewritten he always felt that the machine had come between us. That will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little things that he would think of."
"He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me in the evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to be conspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice was gentle. He'd had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, he told me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating, whispering fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, very neat and plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore tinted glasses against the glare."
"Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather, returned to France?"
"Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again and proposed that we should marry before father came back. He was in dreadful earnest and made me swear, with my hands on the Testament, that whatever happened I would always be true to him. Mother said he was quite right to make me swear, and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother was all in his favour from the first and was even fonder of him than I was. Then, when they talked of marrying within the week, I began to ask about father; but they both said never to mind about father, but just to tell him afterwards, and mother said she would make it all right with him. I didn't quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should ask his leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but I didn't want to do anything on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where the company has its French offices, but the letter came back to me on the very morning of the wedding."
"Yes, sir; for he had started to England just before it arrived."
"Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged, then, for the Friday. Was it to be in church?"
"Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour's, near King's Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St. Pancras Hotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler, which happened to be the only other cab in the street. We got to the church first, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to step out, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box and looked there was no one there! The cabman said that he could not imagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with his own eyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heard anything since then to throw any light upon what became of him."
"But you have no notion as to what it could have been?"
"None."
"One more question. How did your mother take the matter?"
"Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened, and that I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interest could anyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leaving me? Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me and got my money settled on him, there might be some reason, but Hosmer was very independent about money and never would look at a shilling of mine. And yet, what could have happened? And why could he not write? Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can't sleep a wink at night." She pulled a little handkerchief out of her muff and began to sob heavily into it.
"Then you don't think I'll see him again?"
"I fear not."
"Then what has happened to him?"
"You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an accurate description of him and any letters of his which you can spare."
"Thank you. And your address?"
"No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell."
"Mr. Angel's address you never had, I understand. Where is your father's place of business?"
"You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be true to Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back."
For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelled our respect. She laid her little bundle of papers upon the table and went her way, with a promise to come again whenever she might be summoned.
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips still pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, and his gaze directed upward to the ceiling. Then he took down from the rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor, and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor in his face.
"Quite an interesting study, that maiden," he observed. "I found her more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, is rather a trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you consult my index, in Andover in '77, and there was something of the sort at The Hague last year. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two details which were new to me. But the maiden herself was most instructive."
"You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite invisible to me," I remarked.
"Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look, and so you missed all that was important. I can never bring you to realise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails, or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did you gather from that woman's appearance? Describe it."
"Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a feather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dress was brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a little purple plush at the neck and sleeves. Her gloves were greyish and were worn through at the right forefinger. Her boots I didn't observe. She had small round, hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being fairly well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way."
Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.
" 'Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You have really done very well indeed. It is true that you have missed everything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and you have a quick eye for colour. Never trust to general impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is always at a woman's sleeve. In a man it is perhaps better first to take the knee of the trouser. As you observe, this woman had plush upon her sleeves, which is a most useful material for showing traces. The double line a little above the wrist, where the typewritist presses against the table, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, of the hand type, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the side of it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right across the broadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and, observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ventured a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed to surprise her."
"But, surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised and interested on glancing down to observe that, though the boots which she was wearing were not unlike each other, they were really odd ones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a plain one. One was buttoned only in the two lower buttons out of five, and the other at the first, third, and fifth. Now, when you see that a young lady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away in a hurry."
"And what else?" I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, by my friend's incisive reasoning.
"I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving home but after being fully dressed. You observed that her right glove was torn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both glove and finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in a hurry and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, or the mark would not remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing, though rather elementary, but I must go back to business, Watson. Would you mind reading me the advertised description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?"
I held the little printed slip to the light.
"Missing," it said, "on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sallow complexion, black hair, a little bald in the centre, bushy, black side-whiskers and moustache; tinted glasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was dressed, when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert chain, and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots. Known to have been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street. Anybody bringing--"
"That will do," said Holmes. "As to the letters," he continued, glancing over them, "they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue in them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is one remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you."
"They are typewritten," I remarked.
"Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look at the neat little 'Hosmer Angel' at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but no superscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. The point about the signature is very suggestive--in fact, we may call it conclusive."
"Of what?"
"My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it bears upon the case?"
"I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be able to deny his signature if an action for breach of promise were instituted."
"No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters, which should settle the matter. One is to a firm in the City, the other is to the young lady's stepfather, Mr. Windibank, asking him whether he could meet us here at six o'clock to-morrow evening. It is just as well that we should do business with the male relatives. And now, Doctor, we can do nothing until the answers to those letters come, so we may put our little problem upon the shelf for the interim."
I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with the conviction that when I came again on the next evening I would find that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to the identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherland.
A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention at the time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of the sufferer. It was not until close upon six o'clock that I found myself free and was able to spring into a hansom and drive to Baker Street, half afraid that I might be too late to assist at the denouement of the little mystery. I found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half asleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses of his armchair. A formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, with the pungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent his day in the chemical work which was so dear to him.
"No, no, the mystery!" I cried.
"Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. There was never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday, some of the details are of interest. The only drawback is that there is no law, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel."
"Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting Miss Sutherland?"
The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet opened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the passage and a tap at the door.
"This is the girl's stepfather, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes. "He has written to me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!"
The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirty years of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a bland, insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and penetrating grey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed his shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled down into the nearest chair.
"Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes. "I think that this typewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment with me for six o'clock?"
"Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite my own master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland has troubled you about this little matter, for I think it is far better not to wash linen of the sort in public. It was quite against my wishes that she came, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may have noticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up her mind on a point. Of course, I did not mind you so much, as you are not connected with the official police, but it is not pleasant to have a family misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a useless expense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?"
Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves. "I am delighted to hear it," he said.
"Certainly," said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in the door. "I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"
"Oh, it won't do--really it won't," said Holmes suavely. "There is no possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too transparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you said that it was impossible for me to solve so simple a question. That's right! Sit down and let us talk it over."
Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glitter of moisture on his brow. "It--it's not actionable," he stammered.
The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his breast, like one who is utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up on the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands in his pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed, than to us.
"The man married a woman very much older than himself for her money," said he, "and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as long as she lived with them. It was a considerable sum, for people in their position, and the loss of it would have made a serious difference. It was worth an effort to preserve it. The daughter was of a good, amiable disposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted in her ways, so that it was evident that with her fair personal advantages, and her little income, she would not be allowed to remain single long. Now her marriage would mean, of course, the loss of a hundred a year, so what does her stepfather do to prevent it? He takes the obvious course of keeping her at home and forbidding her to seek the company of people of her own age. But soon he found that that would not answer forever. She became restive, insisted upon her rights, and finally announced her positive intention of going to a certain ball. What does her clever stepfather do then? He conceives an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. With the connivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the girl's short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off other lovers by making love himself."
"It was only a joke at first," groaned our visitor. "We never thought that she would have been so carried away."
"Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was very decidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that her stepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery never for an instant entered her mind. She was flattered by the gentleman's attentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressed admiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it was obvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if a real effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and an engagement, which would finally secure the girl's affections from turning towards anyone else. But the deception could not be kept up forever. These pretended journeys to France were rather cumbrous. The thing to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such a dramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon the young lady's mind and prevent her from looking upon any other suitor for some time to come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a Testament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of something happening on the very morning of the wedding. James Windibank wished Miss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as to his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not listen to another man. As far as the church door he brought her, and then, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the old trick of stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the other. I think that was the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!"
"It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but if you are so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who are breaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionable from the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint."
"There's a cold-blooded scoundrel!" said Holmes, laughing, as he threw himself down into his chair once more. "That fellow will rise from crime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest."
"Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr. Hosmer Angel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and it was equally clear that the only man who really profited by the incident, as far as we could see, was the stepfather. Then the fact that the two men were never together, but that the one always appeared when the other was away, was suggestive. So were the tinted spectacles and the curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers. My suspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar action in typewriting his signature, which, of course, inferred that his handwriting was so familiar to her that she would recognise even the smallest sample of it. You see all these isolated facts, together with many minor ones, all pointed in the same direction."
"And how did you verify them?"
"Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. I knew the firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printed description. I eliminated everything from it which could be the result of a disguise--the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I sent it to the firm, with a request that they would inform me whether it answered to the description of any of their travellers. I had already noticed the peculiarities of the typewriter, and I wrote to the man himself at his business address asking him if he would come here. As I expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial but characteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter from Westhouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the description tallied in every respect with that of their employe, James Windibank. Voila tout!"
"And Miss Sutherland?"
"If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the old Persian saying, 'There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub, and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.' There is as much sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as much knowledge of the world."
ADVENTURE IV. THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY
"I really don't know what to say. I have a fairly long list at present."
"I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained through one of them," I answered. "But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for I have only half an hour."
My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effect of making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants were few and simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a cab with my valise, rattling away to Paddington Station. Sherlock Holmes was pacing up and down the platform, his tall, gaunt figure made even gaunter and taller by his long grey travelling-cloak and close-fitting cloth cap.
"It is really very good of you to come, Watson," said he. "It makes a considerable difference to me, having someone with me on whom I can thoroughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless or else biassed. If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the tickets."
"Have you heard anything of the case?" he asked.
"Not a word. I have not seen a paper for some days."
"That sounds a little paradoxical."
"But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a clue. The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more difficult it is to bring it home. In this case, however, they have established a very serious case against the son of the murdered man."
"It is a murder, then?"
"Well, it is conjectured to be so. I shall take nothing for granted until I have the opportunity of looking personally into it. I will explain the state of things to you, as far as I have been able to understand it, in a very few words.
"On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house at Hatherley about three in the afternoon and walked down to the Boscombe Pool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading out of the stream which runs down the Boscombe Valley. He had been out with his serving-man in the morning at Ross, and he had told the man that he must hurry, as he had an appointment of importance to keep at three. From that appointment he never came back alive.
"The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder, the game-keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly wooded round, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. A girl of fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of the lodge-keeper of the Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woods picking flowers. She states that while she was there she saw, at the border of the wood and close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son, and that they appeared to be having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder using very strong language to his son, and she saw the latter raise up his hand as if to strike his father. She was so frightened by their violence that she ran away and told her mother when she reached home that she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling near Boscombe Pool, and that she was afraid that they were going to fight. She had hardly said the words when young Mr. McCarthy came running up to the lodge to say that he had found his father dead in the wood, and to ask for the help of the lodge-keeper. He was much excited, without either his gun or his hat, and his right hand and sleeve were observed to be stained with fresh blood. On following him they found the dead body stretched out upon the grass beside the pool. The head had been beaten in by repeated blows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuries were such as might very well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his son's gun, which was found lying on the grass within a few paces of the body. Under these circumstances the young man was instantly arrested, and a verdict of 'wilful murder' having been returned at the inquest on Tuesday, he was on Wednesday brought before the magistrates at Ross, who have referred the case to the next Assizes. Those are the main facts of the case as they came out before the coroner and the police-court."
"I could hardly imagine a more damning case," I remarked. "If ever circumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so here."
"There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact," he answered, laughing. "Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other obvious facts which may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You know me too well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shall either confirm or destroy his theory by means which he is quite incapable of employing, or even of understanding. To take the first example to hand, I very clearly perceive that in your bedroom the window is upon the right-hand side, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would have noted even so self-evident a thing as that."
"How on earth--"
"My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness which characterises you. You shave every morning, and in this season you shave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is less and less complete as we get farther back on the left side, until it becomes positively slovenly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it is surely very clear that that side is less illuminated than the other. I could not imagine a man of your habits looking at himself in an equal light and being satisfied with such a result. I only quote this as a trivial example of observation and inference. Therein lies my metier, and it is just possible that it may be of some service in the investigation which lies before us. There are one or two minor points which were brought out in the inquest, and which are worth considering."
"What are they?"
"It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but after the return to Hatherley Farm. On the inspector of constabulary informing him that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not surprised to hear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This observation of his had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which might have remained in the minds of the coroner's jury."
"It was a confession," I ejaculated.
"No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence."
"Coming on the top of such a damning series of events, it was at least a most suspicious remark."
"On the contrary," said Holmes, "it is the brightest rift which I can at present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be, he could not be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the circumstances were very black against him. Had he appeared surprised at his own arrest, or feigned indignation at it, I should have looked upon it as highly suspicious, because such surprise or anger would not be natural under the circumstances, and yet might appear to be the best policy to a scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation marks him as either an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraint and firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, it was also not unnatural if you consider that he stood beside the dead body of his father, and that there is no doubt that he had that very day so far forgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, and even, according to the little girl whose evidence is so important, to raise his hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and contrition which are displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of a healthy mind rather than of a guilty one."
I shook my head. "Many men have been hanged on far slighter evidence," I remarked.
He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire paper, and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the paragraph in which the unfortunate young man had given his own statement of what had occurred. I settled myself down in the corner of the carriage and read it very carefully. It ran in this way:
"Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called and gave evidence as follows: 'I had been away from home for three days at Bristol, and had only just returned upon the morning of last Monday, the 3rd. My father was absent from home at the time of my arrival, and I was informed by the maid that he had driven over to Ross with John Cobb, the groom. Shortly after my return I heard the wheels of his trap in the yard, and, looking out of my window, I saw him get out and walk rapidly out of the yard, though I was not aware in which direction he was going. I then took my gun and strolled out in the direction of the Boscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting the rabbit warren which is upon the other side. On my way I saw William Crowder, the game-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence; but he is mistaken in thinking that I was following my father. I had no idea that he was in front of me. When about a hundred yards from the pool I heard a cry of "Cooee!" which was a usual signal between my father and myself. I then hurried forward, and found him standing by the pool. He appeared to be much surprised at seeing me and asked me rather roughly what I was doing there. A conversation ensued which led to high words and almost to blows, for my father was a man of a very violent temper. Seeing that his passion was becoming ungovernable, I left him and returned towards Hatherley Farm. I had not gone more than 150 yards, however, when I heard a hideous outcry behind me, which caused me to run back again. I found my father expiring upon the ground, with his head terribly injured. I dropped my gun and held him in my arms, but he almost instantly expired. I knelt beside him for some minutes, and then made my way to Mr. Turner's lodge-keeper, his house being the nearest, to ask for assistance. I saw no one near my father when I returned, and I have no idea how he came by his injuries. He was not a popular man, being somewhat cold and forbidding in his manners, but he had, as far as I know, no active enemies. I know nothing further of the matter.'
"Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch some allusion to a rat.
"Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he was delirious.
"Witness: It is really impossible for me to tell you. I can assure you that it has nothing to do with the sad tragedy which followed.
"The Coroner: That is for the court to decide. I need not point out to you that your refusal to answer will prejudice your case considerably in any future proceedings which may arise.
"Witness: I must still refuse.
"The Coroner: I understand that the cry of 'Cooee' was a common signal between you and your father?
"Witness (with considerable confusion): I do not know.
"A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your suspicions when you returned on hearing the cry and found your father fatally injured?
"The Coroner: What do you mean?
" 'You cannot say what it was?'
" 'No, I had a feeling something was there.'
" 'About the same.'
" 'Then if it was removed it was while you were within a dozen yards of it?'
"It was very nice and complimentary of you," Holmes answered. "It is entirely a question of barometric pressure."
Lestrade looked startled. "I do not quite follow," he said.
He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the most lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her violet eyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all thought of her natural reserve lost in her overpowering excitement and concern.
"Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" she cried, glancing from one to the other of us, and finally, with a woman's quick intuition, fastening upon my companion, "I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down to tell you so. I know that James didn't do it. I know it, and I want you to start upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt upon that point. We have known each other since we were little children, and I know his faults as no one else does; but he is too tender-hearted to hurt a fly. Such a charge is absurd to anyone who really knows him."
"I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner," said Sherlock Holmes. "You may rely upon my doing all that I can."
"But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Do you not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think that he is innocent?"
"I think that it is very probable."
"There, now!" she cried, throwing back her head and looking defiantly at Lestrade. "You hear! He gives me hopes."
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am afraid that my colleague has been a little quick in forming his conclusions," he said.
"But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it. And about his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason why he would not speak about it to the coroner was because I was concerned in it."
"In what way?" asked Holmes.
"It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had many disagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there should be a marriage between us. James and I have always loved each other as brother and sister; but of course he is young and has seen very little of life yet, and--and--well, he naturally did not wish to do anything like that yet. So there were quarrels, and this, I am sure, was one of them."
"And your father?" asked Holmes. "Was he in favour of such a union?"
"No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favour of it." A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot one of his keen, questioning glances at her.
"The doctor?"
"Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for years back, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken to his bed, and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nervous system is shattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had known dad in the old days in Victoria."
"Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I understand, Mr. Turner made his money."
"Yes, certainly."
"I will, Miss Turner."
"I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if I leave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking." She hurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we heard the wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.
"I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy," said Holmes. "Have you an order to see him in prison?"
"Yes, but only for you and me."
"Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have still time to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?"
"Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very slow, but I shall only be away a couple of hours."
I walked down to the station with them, and then wandered through the streets of the little town, finally returning to the hotel, where I lay upon the sofa and tried to interest myself in a yellow-backed novel. The puny plot of the story was so thin, however, when compared to the deep mystery through which we were groping, and I found my attention wander so continually from the action to the fact, that I at last flung it across the room and gave myself up entirely to a consideration of the events of the day. Supposing that this unhappy young man's story were absolutely true, then what hellish thing, what absolutely unforeseen and extraordinary calamity could have occurred between the time when he parted from his father, and the moment when, drawn back by his screams, he rushed into the glade? It was something terrible and deadly. What could it be? Might not the nature of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts? I rang the bell and called for the weekly county paper, which contained a verbatim account of the inquest. In the surgeon's deposition it was stated that the posterior third of the left parietal bone and the left half of the occipital bone had been shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon. I marked the spot upon my own head. Clearly such a blow must have been struck from behind. That was to some extent in favour of the accused, as when seen quarrelling he was face to face with his father. Still, it did not go for very much, for the older man might have turned his back before the blow fell. Still, it might be worth while to call Holmes' attention to it. Then there was the peculiar dying reference to a rat. What could that mean? It could not be delirium. A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly become delirious. No, it was more likely to be an attempt to explain how he met his fate. But what could it indicate? I cudgelled my brains to find some possible explanation. And then the incident of the grey cloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were true the murderer must have dropped some part of his dress, presumably his overcoat, in his flight, and must have had the hardihood to return and to carry it away at the instant when the son was kneeling with his back turned not a dozen paces off. What a tissue of mysteries and improbabilities the whole thing was! I did not wonder at Lestrade's opinion, and yet I had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes' insight that I could not lose hope as long as every fresh fact seemed to strengthen his conviction of young McCarthy's innocence.
"The glass still keeps very high," he remarked as he sat down. "It is of importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over the ground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and keenest for such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged by a long journey. I have seen young McCarthy."
"And what did you learn from him?"
"Nothing."
"Could he throw no light?"
"None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew who had done it and was screening him or her, but I am convinced now that he is as puzzled as everyone else. He is not a very quick-witted youth, though comely to look at and, I should think, sound at heart."
"Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly, insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was only a lad, and before he really knew her, for she had been away five years at a boarding-school, what does the idiot do but get into the clutches of a barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a registry office? No one knows a word of the matter, but you can imagine how maddening it must be to him to be upbraided for not doing what he would give his very eyes to do, but what he knows to be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzy of this sort which made him throw his hands up into the air when his father, at their last interview, was goading him on to propose to Miss Turner. On the other hand, he had no means of supporting himself, and his father, who was by all accounts a very hard man, would have thrown him over utterly had he known the truth. It was with his barmaid wife that he had spent the last three days in Bristol, and his father did not know where he was. Mark that point. It is of importance. Good has come out of evil, however, for the barmaid, finding from the papers that he is in serious trouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown him over utterly and has written to him to say that she has a husband already in the Bermuda Dockyard, so that there is really no tie between them. I think that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for all that he has suffered."
"Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to two points. One is that the murdered man had an appointment with someone at the pool, and that the someone could not have been his son, for his son was away, and he did not know when he would return. The second is that the murdered man was heard to cry 'Cooee!' before he knew that his son had returned. Those are the crucial points upon which the case depends. And now let us talk about George Meredith, if you please, and we shall leave all minor matters until to-morrow."
"There is serious news this morning," Lestrade observed. "It is said that Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despaired of."
"About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his life abroad, and he has been in failing health for some time. This business has had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of McCarthy's, and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I have learned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free."
"Indeed! That is interesting," said Holmes.
"Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that this McCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to have been under such obligations to Turner, should still talk of marrying his son to Turner's daughter, who is, presumably, heiress to the estate, and that in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely a case of a proposal and all else would follow? It is the more strange, since we know that Turner himself was averse to the idea. The daughter told us as much. Do you not deduce something from that?"
"We have got to the deductions and the inferences," said Lestrade, winking at me. "I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes, without flying away after theories and fancies."
"Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog," said Holmes, laughing. "But I am very much mistaken if this is not Hatherley Farm upon the left."
"Yes, that is it." It was a widespread, comfortable-looking building, two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches of lichen upon the grey walls. The drawn blinds and the smokeless chimneys, however, gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of this horror still lay heavy upon it. We called at the door, when the maid, at Holmes' request, showed us the boots which her master wore at the time of his death, and also a pair of the son's, though not the pair which he had then had. Having measured these very carefully from seven or eight different points, Holmes desired to be led to the court-yard, from which we all followed the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.
"What did you go into the pool for?" he asked.
"Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its inward twist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there it vanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had I been here before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowed all over it. Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came, and they have covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body. But here are three separate tracks of the same feet." He drew out a lens and lay down upon his waterproof to have a better view, talking all the time rather to himself than to us. "These are young McCarthy's feet. Twice he was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles are deeply marked and the heels hardly visible. That bears out his story. He ran when he saw his father on the ground. Then here are the father's feet as he paced up and down. What is this, then? It is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening. And this? Ha, ha! What have we here? Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too, quite unusual boots! They come, they go, they come again--of course that was for the cloak. Now where did they come from?" He ran up and down, sometimes losing, sometimes finding the track until we were well within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of a great beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood. Holmes traced his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon his face with a little cry of satisfaction. For a long time he remained there, turning over the leaves and dried sticks, gathering up what seemed to me to be dust into an envelope and examining with his lens not only the ground but even the bark of the tree as far as he could reach. A jagged stone was lying among the moss, and this also he carefully examined and retained. Then he followed a pathway through the wood until he came to the highroad, where all traces were lost.
"It has been a case of considerable interest," he remarked, returning to his natural manner. "I fancy that this grey house on the right must be the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a word with Moran, and perhaps write a little note. Having done that, we may drive back to our luncheon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be with you presently."
It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and drove back into Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he had picked up in the wood.
"This may interest you, Lestrade," he remarked, holding it out. "The murder was done with it."
"There are none."
"How do you know, then?"
"And the murderer?"
Lestrade laughed. "I am afraid that I am still a sceptic," he said. "Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with a hard-headed British jury."
"Nous verrons," answered Holmes calmly. "You work your own method, and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon, and shall probably return to London by the evening train."
"And leave your case unfinished?"
"No, finished."
"Who was the criminal, then?"
"The gentleman I describe."
"But who is he?"
"Surely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such a populous neighbourhood."
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am a practical man," he said, "and I really cannot undertake to go about the country looking for a left-handed gentleman with a game leg. I should become the laughing-stock of Scotland Yard."
"Look here, Watson," he said when the cloth was cleared "just sit down in this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I don't know quite what to do, and I should value your advice. Light a cigar and let me expound."
"Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about young McCarthy's narrative which struck us both instantly, although they impressed me in his favour and you against him. One was the fact that his father should, according to his account, cry 'Cooee!' before seeing him. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat. He mumbled several words, you understand, but that was all that caught the son's ear. Now from this double point our research must commence, and we will begin it by presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true."
"What of this 'Cooee!' then?"
"Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son, as far as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that he was within earshot. The 'Cooee!' was meant to attract the attention of whoever it was that he had the appointment with. But 'Cooee' is a distinctly Australian cry, and one which is used between Australians. There is a strong presumption that the person whom McCarthy expected to meet him at Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australia."
"What of the rat, then?"
Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened it out on the table. "This is a map of the Colony of Victoria," he said. "I wired to Bristol for it last night." He put his hand over part of the map. "What do you read?"
"And now?" He raised his hand.
"BALLARAT."
"It is wonderful!" I exclaimed.
"It is obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field down considerably. The possession of a grey garment was a third point which, granting the son's statement to be correct, was a certainty. We have come now out of mere vagueness to the definite conception of an Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak."
"And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can only be approached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could hardly wander."
"But how did you gain them?"
"His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of his stride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces."
"Yes, they were peculiar boots."
"But his left-handedness."
"You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded by the surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediately behind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unless it were by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree during the interview between the father and son. He had even smoked there. I found the ash of a cigar, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enables me to pronounce as an Indian cigar. I have, as you know, devoted some attention to this, and written a little monograph on the ashes of 140 different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tobacco. Having found the ash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among the moss where he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of the variety which are rolled in Rotterdam."
"And the cigar-holder?"
"I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore he used a holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut was not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife."
"Holmes," I said, "you have drawn a net round this man from which he cannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly as if you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the direction in which all this points. The culprit is--"
"Mr. John Turner," cried the hotel waiter, opening the door of our sitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.
"Pray sit down on the sofa," said Holmes gently. "You had my note?"
"I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall."
The old man sank his face in his hands. "God help me!" he cried. "But I would not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my word that I would have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes."
"I am glad to hear you say so," said Holmes gravely.
"I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It would break her heart--it will break her heart when she hears that I am arrested."
"I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter who required my presence here, and I am acting in her interests. Young McCarthy must be got off, however."
"I am a dying man," said old Turner. "I have had diabetes for years. My doctor says it is a question whether I shall live a month. Yet I would rather die under my own roof than in a gaol."
Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and a bundle of paper before him. "Just tell us the truth," he said. "I shall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here can witness it. Then I could produce your confession at the last extremity to save young McCarthy. I promise you that I shall not use it unless it is absolutely needed."
"It's as well," said the old man; "it's a question whether I shall live to the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but I should wish to spare Alice the shock. And now I will make the thing clear to you; it has been a long time in the acting, but will not take me long to tell.
"You didn't know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil incarnate. I tell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he. His grip has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blasted my life. I'll tell you first how I came to be in his power.
"It was in the early '60's at the diggings. I was a young chap then, hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at anything; I got among bad companions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim, took to the bush, and in a word became what you would call over here a highway robber. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life of it, sticking up a station from time to time, or stopping the wagons on the road to the diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat was the name I went under, and our party is still remembered in the colony as the Ballarat Gang.
"Well, down they came to the west country, there was no shaking them off, and there they have lived rent free on my best land ever since. There was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness; turn where I would, there was his cunning, grinning face at my elbow. It grew worse as Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more afraid of her knowing my past than of the police. Whatever he wanted he must have, and whatever it was I gave him without question, land, money, houses, until at last he asked a thing which I could not give. He asked for Alice.
"His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and as I was known to be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him that his lad should step into the whole property. But there I was firm. I would not have his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that I had any dislike to the lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. I stood firm. McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst. We were to meet at the pool midway between our houses to talk it over.
"Well, it is not for me to judge you," said Holmes as the old man signed the statement which had been drawn out. "I pray that we may never be exposed to such a temptation."
"God help us!" said Holmes after a long silence. "Why does fate play such tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such a case as this that I do not think of Baxter's words, and say, 'There, but for the grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.' "
James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of a number of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and submitted to the defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven months after our interview, but he is now dead; and there is every prospect that the son and daughter may come to live happily together in ignorance of the black cloud which rests upon their past.
ADVENTURE  V.  THE FIVE ORANGE PIPS
When I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes cases between the years '82 and '90, I am faced by so many which present strange and interesting features that it is no easy matter to know which to choose and which to leave. Some, however, have already gained publicity through the papers, and others have not offered a field for those peculiar qualities which my friend possessed in so high a degree, and which it is the object of these papers to illustrate. Some, too, have baffled his analytical skill, and would be, as narratives, beginnings without an ending, while others have been but partially cleared up, and have their explanations founded rather upon conjecture and surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to him. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable in its details and so startling in its results that I am tempted to give some account of it in spite of the fact that there are points in connection with it which never have been, and probably never will be, entirely cleared up.
The year '87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater or less interest, of which I retain the records. Among my headings under this one twelve months I find an account of the adventure of the Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who held a luxurious club in the lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of the facts connected with the loss of the British barque Sophy Anderson, of the singular adventures of the Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa, and finally of the Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as may be remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man's watch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and that therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time--a deduction which was of the greatest importance in clearing up the case. All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none of them present such singular features as the strange train of circumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.
"Why," said I, glancing up at my companion, "that was surely the bell. Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?"
"Except yourself I have none," he answered. "I do not encourage visitors."
"A client, then?"
Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came a step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He stretched out his long arm to turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer must sit.
The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the outside, well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refinement and delicacy in his bearing. The streaming umbrella which he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather through which he had come. He looked about him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that his face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is weighed down with some great anxiety.
"I owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez to his eyes. "I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have brought some traces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber."
"Give me your coat and umbrella," said Holmes. "They may rest here on the hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from the south-west, I see."
"That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is quite distinctive."
"I have come for advice."
"And help."
"I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast how you saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal."
"Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards."
"He said too much."
"That you are never beaten."
"I have been beaten four times--three times by men, and once by a woman."
"But what is that compared with the number of your successes?"
"Then you may be so with me."
"I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour me with some details as to your case."
"None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal."
"And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you have ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of events than those which have happened in my own family."
"You fill me with interest," said Holmes. "Pray give us the essential facts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as to those details which seem to me to be most important."
The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out towards the blaze.
"My name," said he, "is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, as far as I can understand, little to do with this awful business. It is a hereditary matter; so in order to give you an idea of the facts, I must go back to the commencement of the affair.
"My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man and became a planter in Florida, where he was reported to have done very well. At the time of the war he fought in Jackson's army, and afterwards under Hood, where he rose to be a colonel. When Lee laid down his arms my uncle returned to his plantation, where he remained for three or four years. About 1869 or 1870 he came back to Europe and took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham. He had made a very considerable fortune in the States, and his reason for leaving them was his aversion to the negroes, and his dislike of the Republican policy in extending the franchise to them. He was a singular man, fierce and quick-tempered, very foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a most retiring disposition. During all the years that he lived at Horsham, I doubt if ever he set foot in the town. He had a garden and two or three fields round his house, and there he would take his exercise, though very often for weeks on end he would never leave his room. He drank a great deal of brandy and smoked very heavily, but he would see no society and did not want any friends, not even his own brother.
"He didn't mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the time when he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so. This would be in the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years in England. He begged my father to let me live with him and he was very kind to me in his way. When he was sober he used to be fond of playing backgammon and draughts with me, and he would make me his representative both with the servants and with the tradespeople, so that by the time that I was sixteen I was quite master of the house. I kept all the keys and could go where I liked and do what I liked, so long as I did not disturb him in his privacy. There was one singular exception, however, for he had a single room, a lumber-room up among the attics, which was invariably locked, and which he would never permit either me or anyone else to enter. With a boy's curiosity I have peeped through the keyhole, but I was never able to see more than such a collection of old trunks and bundles as would be expected in such a room.
"One day--it was in March, 1883--a letter with a foreign stamp lay upon the table in front of the colonel's plate. It was not a common thing for him to receive letters, for his bills were all paid in ready money, and he had no friends of any sort. 'From India!' said he as he took it up, 'Pondicherry postmark! What can this be?' Opening it hurriedly, out there jumped five little dried orange pips, which pattered down upon his plate. I began to laugh at this, but the laugh was struck from my lips at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen, his eyes were protruding, his skin the colour of putty, and he glared at the envelope which he still held in his trembling hand, 'K. K. K.!' he shrieked, and then, 'My God, my God, my sins have overtaken me!'
" 'Death,' said he, and rising from the table he retired to his room, leaving me palpitating with horror. I took up the envelope and saw scrawled in red ink upon the inner flap, just above the gum, the letter K three times repeated. There was nothing else save the five dried pips. What could be the reason of his overpowering terror? I left the breakfast-table, and as I ascended the stair I met him coming down with an old rusty key, which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand, and a small brass box, like a cashbox, in the other.
"I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked to step up to the room. The fire was burning brightly, and in the grate there was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned paper, while the brass box stood open and empty beside it. As I glanced at the box I noticed, with a start, that upon the lid was printed the treble K which I had read in the morning upon the envelope.
" 'I wish you, John,' said my uncle, 'to witness my will. I leave my estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, to my brother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to you. If you can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you cannot, take my advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. I am sorry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I can't say what turn things are going to take. Kindly sign the paper where Mr. Fordham shows you.'
"I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away with him. The singular incident made, as you may think, the deepest impression upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it every way in my mind without being able to make anything of it. Yet I could not shake off the vague feeling of dread which it left behind, though the sensation grew less keen as the weeks passed and nothing happened to disturb the usual routine of our lives. I could see a change in my uncle, however. He drank more than ever, and he was less inclined for any sort of society. Most of his time he would spend in his room, with the door locked upon the inside, but sometimes he would emerge in a sort of drunken frenzy and would burst out of the house and tear about the garden with a revolver in his hand, screaming out that he was afraid of no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen, by man or devil. When these hot fits were over, however, he would rush tumultuously in at the door and lock and bar it behind him, like a man who can brazen it out no longer against the terror which lies at the roots of his soul. At such times I have seen his face, even on a cold day, glisten with moisture, as though it were new raised from a basin.
"One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I foresee, one of the most remarkable to which I have ever listened. Let me have the date of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date of his supposed suicide."
"The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks later, upon the night of May 2nd."
"Thank you. Pray proceed."
"When my father took over the Horsham property, he, at my request, made a careful examination of the attic, which had been always locked up. We found the brass box there, although its contents had been destroyed. On the inside of the cover was a paper label, with the initials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and 'Letters, memoranda, receipts, and a register' written beneath. These, we presume, indicated the nature of the papers which had been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there was nothing of much importance in the attic save a great many scattered papers and note-books bearing upon my uncle's life in America. Some of them were of the war time and showed that he had done his duty well and had borne the repute of a brave soldier. Others were of a date during the reconstruction of the Southern states, and were mostly concerned with politics, for he had evidently taken a strong part in opposing the carpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from the North.
"Well, it was the beginning of '84 when my father came to live at Horsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the January of '85. On the fourth day after the new year I heard my father give a sharp cry of surprise as we sat together at the breakfast-table. There he was, sitting with a newly opened envelope in one hand and five dried orange pips in the outstretched palm of the other one. He had always laughed at what he called my cock-and-bull story about the colonel, but he looked very scared and puzzled now that the same thing had come upon himself.
" 'Why, what on earth does this mean, John?' he stammered.
"My heart had turned to lead. 'It is K. K. K.,' said I.
" 'The sundial in the garden. There is no other,' said I; 'but the papers must be those that are destroyed.'
" 'From Dundee,' I answered, glancing at the postmark.
" 'Some preposterous practical joke,' said he. 'What have I to do with sundials and papers? I shall take no notice of such nonsense.'
" 'I should certainly speak to the police,' I said.
" 'And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of the sort.'
" 'No, I forbid you. I won't have a fuss made about such nonsense.'
"On the third day after the coming of the letter my father went from home to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is in command of one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill. I was glad that he should go, for it seemed to me that he was farther from danger when he was away from home. In that, however, I was in error. Upon the second day of his absence I received a telegram from the major, imploring me to come at once. My father had fallen over one of the deep chalk-pits which abound in the neighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with a shattered skull. I hurried to him, but he passed away without having ever recovered his consciousness. He had, as it appears, been returning from Fareham in the twilight, and as the country was unknown to him, and the chalk-pit unfenced, the jury had no hesitation in bringing in a verdict of 'death from accidental causes.' Carefully as I examined every fact connected with his death, I was unable to find anything which could suggest the idea of murder. There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, no robbery, no record of strangers having been seen upon the roads. And yet I need not tell you that my mind was far from at ease, and that I was well-nigh certain that some foul plot had been woven round him.
"In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask me why I did not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well convinced that our troubles were in some way dependent upon an incident in my uncle's life, and that the danger would be as pressing in one house as in another.
The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, and turning to the table he shook out upon it five little dried orange pips.
"This is the envelope," he continued. "The postmark is London--eastern division. Within are the very words which were upon my father's last message: 'K. K. K.'; and then 'Put the papers on the sundial.' "
"What have you done?" asked Holmes.
"Nothing."
"Nothing?"
"To tell the truth"--he sank his face into his thin, white hands--"I have felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits when the snake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in the grasp of some resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and no precautions can guard against."
"Tut! tut!" cried Sherlock Holmes. "You must act, man, or you are lost. Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time for despair."
"I have seen the police."
Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. "Incredible imbecility!" he cried.
"They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in the house with me."
"There is one thing," said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coat pocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted paper, he laid it out upon the table. "I have some remembrance," said he, "that on the day when my uncle burned the papers I observed that the small, unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of this particular colour. I found this single sheet upon the floor of his room, and I am inclined to think that it may be one of the papers which has, perhaps, fluttered out from among the others, and in that way has escaped destruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps us much. I think myself that it is a page from some private diary. The writing is undoubtedly my uncle's."
Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper, which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from a book. It was headed, "March, 1869," and beneath were the following enigmatical notices:
"4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.
"7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and
        John Swain, of St. Augustine.
"Thank you!" said Holmes, folding up the paper and returning it to our visitor. "And now you must on no account lose another instant. We cannot spare time even to discuss what you have told me. You must get home instantly and act."
"What shall I do?"
"Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I think that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our web to weave, while theirs is already woven. The first consideration is to remove the pressing danger which threatens you. The second is to clear up the mystery and to punish the guilty parties."
"I thank you," said the young man, rising and pulling on his overcoat. "You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall certainly do as you advise."
"By train from Waterloo."
"I am armed."
"That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case."
"No, your secret lies in London. It is there that I shall seek it."
"Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as to the box and the papers. I shall take your advice in every particular." He shook hands with us and took his leave. Outside the wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pattered against the windows. This strange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amid the mad elements--blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a gale--and now to have been reabsorbed by them once more.
"Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four."
"Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems to me to be walking amid even greater perils than did the Sholtos."
"But have you," I asked, "formed any definite conception as to what these perils are?"
"Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursue this unhappy family?"
Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the arms of his chair, with his finger-tips together. "The ideal reasoner," he remarked, "would, when he had once been shown a single fact in all its bearings, deduce from it not only all the chain of events which led up to it but also all the results which would follow from it. As Cuvier could correctly describe a whole animal by the contemplation of a single bone, so the observer who has thoroughly understood one link in a series of incidents should be able to accurately state all the other ones, both before and after. We have not yet grasped the results which the reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in the study which have baffled all those who have sought a solution by the aid of their senses. To carry the art, however, to its highest pitch, it is necessary that the reasoner should be able to utilise all the facts which have come to his knowledge; and this in itself implies, as you will readily see, a possession of all knowledge, which, even in these days of free education and encyclopaedias, is a somewhat rare accomplishment. It is not so impossible, however, that a man should possess all knowledge which is likely to be useful to him in his work, and this I have endeavoured in my case to do. If I remember rightly, you on one occasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined my limits in a very precise fashion."
Holmes grinned at the last item. "Well," he said, "I say now, as I said then, that a man should keep his little brain-attic stocked with all the furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest he can put away in the lumber-room of his library, where he can get it if he wants it. Now, for such a case as the one which has been submitted to us to-night, we need certainly to muster all our resources. Kindly hand me down the letter K of the American Encyclopaedia which stands upon the shelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consider the situation and see what may be deduced from it. In the first place, we may start with a strong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strong reason for leaving America. Men at his time of life do not change all their habits and exchange willingly the charming climate of Florida for the lonely life of an English provincial town. His extreme love of solitude in England suggests the idea that he was in fear of someone or something, so we may assume as a working hypothesis that it was fear of someone or something which drove him from America. As to what it was he feared, we can only deduce that by considering the formidable letters which were received by himself and his successors. Did you remark the postmarks of those letters?"
"The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the third from London."
"From East London. What do you deduce from that?"
"They are all seaports. That the writer was on board of a ship."
"A greater distance to travel."
"But the letter had also a greater distance to come."
"Then I do not see the point."
"It is possible."
"Good God!" I cried. "What can it mean, this relentless persecution?"
"The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital importance to the person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think that it is quite clear that there must be more than one of them. A single man could not have carried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive a coroner's jury. There must have been several in it, and they must have been men of resource and determination. Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be the initials of an individual and becomes the badge of a society."
"But of what society?"
"Have you never--" said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and sinking his voice--"have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"
"I never have."
Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. "Here it is," said he presently:
" 'Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to the sound produced by cocking a rifle. This terrible secret society was formed by some ex-Confederate soldiers in the Southern states after the Civil War, and it rapidly formed local branches in different parts of the country, notably in Tennessee, Louisiana, the Carolinas, Georgia, and Florida. Its power was used for political purposes, principally for the terrorising of the negro voters and the murdering and driving from the country of those who were opposed to its views. Its outrages were usually preceded by a warning sent to the marked man in some fantastic but generally recognised shape--a sprig of oak-leaves in some parts, melon seeds or orange pips in others. On receiving this the victim might either openly abjure his former ways, or might fly from the country. If he braved the matter out, death would unfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange and unforeseen manner. So perfect was the organisation of the society, and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly a case upon record where any man succeeded in braving it with impunity, or in which any of its outrages were traced home to the perpetrators. For some years the organisation flourished in spite of the efforts of the United States government and of the better classes of the community in the South. Eventually, in the year 1869, the movement rather suddenly collapsed, although there have been sporadic outbreaks of the same sort since that date.'
"You will observe," said Holmes, laying down the volume, "that the sudden breaking up of the society was coincident with the disappearance of Openshaw from America with their papers. It may well have been cause and effect. It is no wonder that he and his family have some of the more implacable spirits upon their track. You can understand that this register and diary may implicate some of the first men in the South, and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it is recovered."
It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a subdued brightness through the dim veil which hangs over the great city. Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I came down.
"What steps will you take?" I asked.
"It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries. I may have to go down to Horsham, after all."
As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table and glanced my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a chill to my heart.
"Holmes," I cried, "you are too late."
"Ah!" said he, laying down his cup, "I feared as much. How was it done?" He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.
"My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading 'Tragedy Near Waterloo Bridge.' Here is the account:
" 'Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the H Division, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and a splash in the water. The night, however, was extremely dark and stormy, so that, in spite of the help of several passers-by, it was quite impossible to effect a rescue. The alarm, however, was given, and, by the aid of the water-police, the body was eventually recovered. It proved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it appears from an envelope which was found in his pocket, was John Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham. It is conjectured that he may have been hurrying down to catch the last train from Waterloo Station, and that in his haste and the extreme darkness he missed his path and walked over the edge of one of the small landing-places for river steamboats. The body exhibited no traces of violence, and there can be no doubt that the deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate accident, which should have the effect of calling the attention of the authorities to the condition of the riverside landing-stages.' "
We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed and shaken than I had ever seen him.
"That hurts my pride, Watson," he said at last. "It is a petty feeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal matter with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon this gang. That he should come to me for help, and that I should send him away to his death--!" He sprang from his chair and paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon his sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and unclasping of his long thin hands.
"No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may take the flies, but not before."
All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in the evening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had not come back yet. It was nearly ten o'clock before he entered, looking pale and worn. He walked up to the sideboard, and tearing a piece from the loaf he devoured it voraciously, washing it down with a long draught of water.
"Nothing?"
"Not a bite. I had no time to think of it."
"You have a clue?"
"What do you mean?"
He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces he squeezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five and thrust them into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote "S. H. for J. O." Then he sealed it and addressed it to "Captain James Calhoun, Barque Lone Star, Savannah, Georgia."
"And who is this Captain Calhoun?"
"The leader of the gang. I shall have the others, but he first."
"How did you trace it, then?"
"I have spent the whole day," said he, "over Lloyd's registers and files of the old papers, following the future career of every vessel which touched at Pondicherry in January and February in '83. There were thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported there during those months. Of these, one, the Lone Star, instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was reported as having cleared from London, the name is that which is given to one of the states of the Union."
"Texas, I think."
"I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship must have an American origin."
"What then?"
"I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque Lone Star was there in January, '85, my suspicion became a certainty. I then inquired as to the vessels which lay at present in the port of London."
"The Lone Star had arrived here last week. I went down to the Albert Dock and found that she had been taken down the river by the early tide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired to Gravesend and learned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is easterly I have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and not very far from the Isle of Wight."
"Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn, the only native-born Americans in the ship. The others are Finns and Germans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship last night. I had it from the stevedore who has been loading their cargo. By the time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah the mail-boat will have carried this letter, and the cable will have informed the police of Savannah that these three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon a charge of murder."
There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans, and the murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the orange pips which would show them that another, as cunning and as resolute as themselves, was upon their track. Very long and very severe were the equinoctial gales that year. We waited long for news of the Lone Star of Savannah, but none ever reached us. We did at last hear that somewhere far out in the Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boat was seen swinging in the trough of a wave, with the letters "L. S." carved upon it, and that is all which we shall ever know of the fate of the Lone Star.
One night--it was in June, '89--there came a ring to my bell, about the hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the clock. I sat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work down in her lap and made a little face of disappointment.
"A patient!" said she. "You'll have to go out."
I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.
We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps upon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in some dark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.
"You will excuse my calling so late," she began, and then, suddenly losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about my wife's neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. "Oh, I'm in such trouble!" she cried; "I do so want a little help."
"I didn't know what to do, so I came straight to you." That was always the way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds to a light-house.
It seems that it was. She had the surest information that of late he had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the farthest east of the City. Hitherto his orgies had always been confined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and shattered, in the evening. But now the spell had been upon him eight-and-forty hours, and he lay there, doubtless among the dregs of the docks, breathing in the poison or sleeping off the effects. There he was to be found, she was sure of it, at the Bar of Gold, in Upper Swandam Lane. But what was she to do? How could she, a young and timid woman, make her way into such a place and pluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surrounded him?
There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it. Might I not escort her to this place? And then, as a second thought, why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitney's medical adviser, and as such I had influence over him. I could manage it better if I were alone. I promised her on my word that I would send him home in a cab within two hours if he were indeed at the address which she had given me. And so in ten minutes I had left my armchair and cheery sitting-room behind me, and was speeding eastward in a hansom on a strange errand, as it seemed to me at the time, though the future only could show how strange it was to be.
As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe for me and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.
"Thank you. I have not come to stay," said I. "There is a friend of mine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him."
There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and peering through the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and unkempt, staring out at me.
"My God! It's Watson," said he. He was in a pitiable state of reaction, with every nerve in a twitter. "I say, Watson, what o'clock is it?"
"Of what day?"
"I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting this two days for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!"
"Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I owe, Watson. I am all off colour. I can do nothing for myself."
I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of sleepers, holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the drug, and looking about for the manager. As I passed the tall man who sat by the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voice whispered, "Walk past me, and then look back at me." The words fell quite distinctly upon my ear. I glanced down. They could only have come from the old man at my side, and yet he sat now as absorbed as ever, very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling down from between his knees, as though it had dropped in sheer lassitude from his fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back. It took all my self-control to prevent me from breaking out into a cry of astonishment. He had turned his back so that none could see him but I. His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dull eyes had regained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire and grinning at my surprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He made a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he turned his face half round to the company once more, subsided into a doddering, loose-lipped senility.
It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes' requests, for they were always so exceedingly definite, and put forward with such a quiet air of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney was once confined in the cab my mission was practically accomplished; and for the rest, I could not wish anything better than to be associated with my friend in one of those singular adventures which were the normal condition of his existence. In a few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitney's bill, led him out to the cab, and seen him driven through the darkness. In a very short time a decrepit figure had emerged from the opium den, and I was walking down the street with Sherlock Holmes. For two streets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot. Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out and burst into a hearty fit of laughter.
"I suppose, Watson," said he, "that you imagine that I have added opium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other little weaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical views."
"I was certainly surprised to find you there."
"But not more so than I to find you."
"And I to find an enemy."
"An enemy?"
"Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my natural prey. Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very remarkable inquiry, and I have hoped to find a clue in the incoherent ramblings of these sots, as I have done before now. Had I been recognised in that den my life would not have been worth an hour's purchase; for I have used it before now for my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn to have vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at the back of that building, near the corner of Paul's Wharf, which could tell some strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless nights."
"What! You do not mean bodies?"
"Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had $1000 for every poor devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilest murder-trap on the whole riverside, and I fear that Neville St. Clair has entered it never to leave it more. But our trap should be here." He put his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled shrilly--a signal which was answered by a similar whistle from the distance, followed shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses' hoofs.
"Now, Watson," said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through the gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its side lanterns. "You'll come with me, won't you?"
"Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler still more so. My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one."
"The Cedars?"
"Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair's house. I am staying there while I conduct the inquiry."
"Where is it, then?"
"But I am all in the dark."
He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through the endless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which widened gradually, until we were flying across a broad balustraded bridge, with the murky river flowing sluggishly beneath us. Beyond lay another dull wilderness of bricks and mortar, its silence broken only by the heavy, regular footfall of the policeman, or the songs and shouts of some belated party of revellers. A dull wrack was drifting slowly across the sky, and a star or two twinkled dimly here and there through the rifts of the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon his breast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I sat beside him, curious to learn what this new quest might be which seemed to tax his powers so sorely, and yet afraid to break in upon the current of his thoughts. We had driven several miles, and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt of suburban villas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, and lit up his pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself that he is acting for the best.
"You forget that I know nothing about it."
"Proceed, then."
"Some years ago--to be definite, in May, 1884--there came to Lee a gentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to have plenty of money. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely, and lived generally in good style. By degrees he made friends in the neighbourhood, and in 1887 he married the daughter of a local brewer, by whom he now has two children. He had no occupation, but was interested in several companies and went into town as a rule in the morning, returning by the 5:14 from Cannon Street every night. Mr. St. Clair is now thirty-seven years of age, is a man of temperate habits, a good husband, a very affectionate father, and a man who is popular with all who know him. I may add that his whole debts at the present moment, as far as we have been able to ascertain, amount to $88 10s., while he has $220 standing to his credit in the Capital and Counties Bank. There is no reason, therefore, to think that money troubles have been weighing upon his mind.
"Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier than usual, remarking before he started that he had two important commissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boy home a box of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife received a telegram upon this same Monday, very shortly after his departure, to the effect that a small parcel of considerable value which she had been expecting was waiting for her at the offices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company. Now, if you are well up in your London, you will know that the office of the company is in Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper Swandam Lane, where you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch, started for the City, did some shopping, proceeded to the company's office, got her packet, and found herself at exactly 4:35 walking through Swandam Lane on her way back to the station. Have you followed me so far?"
"So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple who lives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was certainly the last human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. His name is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar to every man who goes much to the City. He is a professional beggar, though in order to avoid the police regulations he pretends to a small trade in wax vestas. Some little distance down Threadneedle Street, upon the left-hand side, there is, as you may have remarked, a small angle in the wall. Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat, cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as he is a piteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends into the greasy leather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him. I have watched the fellow more than once before ever I thought of making his professional acquaintance, and I have been surprised at the harvest which he has reaped in a short time. His appearance, you see, is so remarkable that no one can pass him without observing him. A shock of orange hair, a pale face disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its contraction, has turned up the outer edge of his upper lip, a bulldog chin, and a pair of very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singular contrast to the colour of his hair, all mark him out from amid the common crowd of mendicants and so, too, does his wit, for he is ever ready with a reply to any piece of chaff which may be thrown at him by the passers-by. This is the man whom we now learn to have been the lodger at the opium den, and to have been the last man to see the gentleman of whom we are in quest."
"But a cripple!" said I. "What could he have done single-handed against a man in the prime of life?"
"He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in other respects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man. Surely your medical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb is often compensated for by exceptional strength in the others."
"And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they had feared to find. It was Neville St. Clair's coat, and not Neville St. Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And what do you think they found in the pockets?"
"I cannot imagine."
"But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the room. Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?"
"No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose that this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, there is no human eye which could have seen the deed. What would he do then? It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of the tell-tale garments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the act of throwing it out, when it would occur to him that it would swim and not sink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle downstairs when the wife tried to force her way up, and perhaps he has already heard from his Lascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the street. There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret hoard, where he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary, and he stuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his hands into the pockets to make sure of the coat's sinking. He throws it out, and would have done the same with the other garments had not he heard the rush of steps below, and only just had time to close the window when the police appeared."
"Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a better. Boone, as I have told you, was arrested and taken to the station, but it could not be shown that there had ever before been anything against him. He had for years been known as a professional beggar, but his life appeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one. There the matter stands at present, and the questions which have to be solved--what Neville St. Clair was doing in the opium den, what happened to him when there, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with his disappearance--are all as far from a solution as ever. I confess that I cannot recall any case within my experience which looked at the first glance so simple and yet which presented such difficulties."
We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its own grounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse's head, and springing down, I followed Holmes up the small, winding gravel-drive which led to the house. As we approached, the door flew open, and a little blonde woman stood in the opening, clad in some sort of light mousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck and wrists. She stood with her figure outlined against the flood of light, one hand upon the door, one half-raised in her eagerness, her body slightly bent, her head and face protruded, with eager eyes and parted lips, a standing question.
"No good news?"
"None."
"No."
"This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to me in several of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible for me to bring him out and associate him with this investigation."
"Certainly, madam."
"Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given to fainting. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion."
"Upon what point?"
"In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?"
"Frankly, then, madam, I do not."
"I do."
"Murdered?"
"I don't say that. Perhaps."
"And on what day did he meet his death?"
"On Monday."
Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been galvanised.
"Yes, to-day." She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of paper in the air.
He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out upon the table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently. I had left my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The envelope was a very coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend postmark and with the date of that very day, or rather of the day before, for it was considerably after midnight.
"No, but the enclosure is."
"I perceive also that whoever addressed the envelope had to go and inquire as to the address."
"How can you tell that?"
"The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried itself. The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that blotting-paper has been used. If it had been written straight off, and then blotted, none would be of a deep black shade. This man has written the name, and there has then been a pause before he wrote the address, which can only mean that he was not familiar with it. It is, of course, a trifle, but there is nothing so important as trifles. Let us now see the letter. Ha! there has been an enclosure here!"
"Yes, there was a ring. His signet-ring."
"One of his hands."
"One?"
"His hand when he wrote hurriedly. It is very unlike his usual writing, and yet I know it well."
"But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes."
"Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent. The ring, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him."
"Very well. It may, however, have been written on Monday and only posted to-day."
"That is possible."
"If so, much may have happened between."
"Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is well with him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I should know if evil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him last he cut himself in the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room rushed upstairs instantly with the utmost certainty that something had happened. Do you think that I would respond to such a trifle and yet be ignorant of his death?"
"I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman may be more valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoner. And in this letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence to corroborate your view. But if your husband is alive and able to write letters, why should he remain away from you?"
"I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable."
"And you were surprised to see him in Swandam Lane?"
"Then he might have called to you?"
"He might."
"He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?"
"Yes."
"Yes. He waved his hands."
"But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at the unexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?"
"And you thought he was pulled back?"
"He disappeared so suddenly."
"He might have leaped back. You did not see anyone else in the room?"
"No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, and the Lascar was at the foot of the stairs."
"But without his collar or tie. I distinctly saw his bare throat."
"Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?"
"Never."
"Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?"
"Never."
"Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the principal points about which I wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a little supper and then retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow."
A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our disposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary after my night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, however, who, when he had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for days, and even for a week, without rest, turning it over, rearranging his facts, looking at it from every point of view until he had either fathomed it or convinced himself that his data were insufficient. It was soon evident to me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting. He took off his coat and waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown, and then wandered about the room collecting pillows from his bed and cushions from the sofa and armchairs. With these he constructed a sort of Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged, with an ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front of him. In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there, an old briar pipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the corner of the ceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him, silent, motionless, with the light shining upon his strong-set aquiline features. So he sat as I dropped off to sleep, and so he sat when a sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I found the summer sun shining into the apartment. The pipe was still between his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and the room was full of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of the heap of shag which I had seen upon the previous night.
"Awake, Watson?" he asked.
"Yes."
"Game for a morning drive?"
As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one was stirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had hardly finished when Holmes returned with the news that the boy was putting in the horse.
"I want to test a little theory of mine," said he, pulling on his boots. "I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence of one of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve to be kicked from here to Charing Cross. But I think I have the key of the affair now."
"And where is it?" I asked, smiling.
"In the bathroom," he answered. "Oh, yes, I am not joking," he continued, seeing my look of incredulity. "I have just been there, and I have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag. Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock."
We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into the bright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and trap, with the half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both sprang in, and away we dashed down the London Road. A few country carts were stirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but the lines of villas on either side were as silent and lifeless as some city in a dream.
In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily from their windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey side. Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the river, and dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the right and found ourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well known to the force, and the two constables at the door saluted him. One of them held the horse's head while the other led us in.
"Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?" A tall, stout official had come down the stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket. "I wish to have a quiet word with you, Bradstreet." "Certainly, Mr. Holmes. Step into my room here." It was a small, office-like room, with a huge ledger upon the table, and a telephone projecting from the wall. The inspector sat down at his desk.
"What can I do for you, Mr. Holmes?"
"I called about that beggarman, Boone--the one who was charged with being concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee."
"Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries."
"So I heard. You have him here?"
"In the cells."
"Is he quiet?"
"Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty scoundrel."
"Dirty?"
"Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face is as black as a tinker's. Well, when once his case has been settled, he will have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you would agree with me that he needed it."
"I should like to see him very much."
"No, I think that I'll take it."
"Very good. Come this way, if you please." He led us down a passage, opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and brought us to a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side.
"The third on the right is his," said the inspector. "Here it is!" He quietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the door and glanced through.
"He's a beauty, isn't he?" said the inspector.
"He certainly needs a wash," remarked Holmes. "I had an idea that he might, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me." He opened the Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my astonishment, a very large bath-sponge.
"He! he! You are a funny one," chuckled the inspector.
"Great heavens!" cried the inspector, "it is, indeed, the missing man. I know him from the photograph."
The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandons himself to his destiny. "Be it so," said he. "And pray what am I charged with?"
"No crime, but a very great error has been committed," said Holmes. "You would have done better to have trusted you wife."
"It was not the wife; it was the children," groaned the prisoner. "God help me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My God! What an exposure! What can I do?"
"If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up," said he, "of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other hand, if you convince the police authorities that there is no possible case against you, I do not know that there is any reason that the details should find their way into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, I am sure, make notes upon anything which you might tell us and submit it to the proper authorities. The case would then never go into court at all."
"God bless you!" cried the prisoner passionately. "I would have endured imprisonment, ay, even execution, rather than have left my miserable secret as a family blot to my children.
"As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took a house in the country, and eventually married, without anyone having a suspicion as to my real occupation. My dear wife knew that I had business in the City. She little knew what.
"Good God! What a week she must have spent!"
"The police have watched this Lascar," said Inspector Bradstreet, "and I can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post a letter unobserved. Probably he handed it to some sailor customer of his, who forgot all about it for some days."
"That was it," said Holmes, nodding approvingly; "I have no doubt of it. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?"
"Many times; but what was a fine to me?"
"It must stop here, however," said Bradstreet. "If the police are to hush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone."
"I reached this one," said my friend, "by sitting upon five pillows and consuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to Baker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast."
"You are engaged," said I; "perhaps I interrupt you."
"No, no. No crime," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "Only one of those whimsical little incidents which will happen when you have four million human beings all jostling each other within the space of a few square miles. Amid the action and reaction of so dense a swarm of humanity, every possible combination of events may be expected to take place, and many a little problem will be presented which may be striking and bizarre without being criminal. We have already had experience of such."
"So much so," I remarked, "that of the last six cases which I have added to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime."
"Yes."
"It is his hat."
"No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will look upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual problem. And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Peterson's fire. The facts are these: about four o'clock on Christmas morning, Peterson, who, as you know, is a very honest fellow, was returning from some small jollification and was making his way homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of him he saw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, and carrying a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached the corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger and a little knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked off the man's hat, on which he raised his stick to defend himself and, swinging it over his head, smashed the shop window behind him. Peterson had rushed forward to protect the stranger from his assailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, and seeing an official-looking person in uniform rushing towards him, dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back of Tottenham Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the appearance of Peterson, so that he was left in possession of the field of battle, and also of the spoils of victory in the shape of this battered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose."
"My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that 'For Mrs. Henry Baker' was printed upon a small card which was tied to the bird's left leg, and it is also true that the initials 'H. B.' are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are some thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easy to restore lost property to any one of them."
"He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning, knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me. The goose we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eaten without unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it off, therefore, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinner."
"Did he not advertise?"
"No."
"Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?"
"From his hat?"
I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round shape, hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of red silk, but was a good deal discoloured. There was no maker's name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials "H. B." were scrawled upon one side. It was pierced in the brim for a hat-securer, but the elastic was missing. For the rest, it was cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places, although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide the discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.
"I can see nothing," said I, handing it back to my friend.
"On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail, however, to reason from what you see. You are too timid in drawing your inferences."
He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective fashion which was characteristic of him. "It is perhaps less suggestive than it might have been," he remarked, "and yet there are a few inferences which are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least a strong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectual is of course obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was fairly well-to-do within the last three years, although he has now fallen upon evil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointing to a moral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of his fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink, at work upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact that his wife has ceased to love him."
"He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect," he continued, disregarding my remonstrance. "He is a man who leads a sedentary life, goes out little, is out of training entirely, is middle-aged, has grizzled hair which he has had cut within the last few days, and which he anoints with lime-cream. These are the more patent facts which are to be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way, that it is extremely improbable that he has gas laid on in his house."
"Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you these results, you are unable to see how they are attained?"
"I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I am unable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that this man was intellectual?"
For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right over the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. "It is a question of cubic capacity," said he; "a man with so large a brain must have something in it."
"The decline of his fortunes, then?"
Sherlock Holmes laughed. "Here is the foresight," said he putting his finger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer. "They are never sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of a certain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take this precaution against the wind. But since we see that he has broken the elastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that he has less foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of a weakening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavoured to conceal some of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is a sign that he has not entirely lost his self-respect."
"Your reasoning is certainly plausible."
"But he might be a bachelor."
"Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to his wife. Remember the card upon the bird's leg."
"You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deduce that the gas is not laid on in his house?"
"One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I see no less than five, I think that there can be little doubt that the individual must be brought into frequent contact with burning tallow--walks upstairs at night probably with his hat in one hand and a guttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stains from a gas-jet. Are you satisfied?"
"Well, it is very ingenious," said I, laughing; "but since, as you said just now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm done save the loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of energy."
"Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped off through the kitchen window?" Holmes twisted himself round upon the sofa to get a fairer view of the man's excited face.
"See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!" He held out his hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantly scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but of such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in the dark hollow of his hand.
"A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though it were putty."
"It's more than a precious stone. It is the precious stone."
"Not the Countess of Morcar's blue carbuncle!" I ejaculated.
"Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I have read the advertisement about it in The Times every day lately. It is absolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured, but the reward offered of $1000 is certainly not within a twentieth part of the market price."
"That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there are sentimental considerations in the background which would induce the Countess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover the gem."
"It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan," I remarked.
"Hum! So much for the police-court," said Holmes thoughtfully, tossing aside the paper. "The question for us now to solve is the sequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the crop of a goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see, Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a much more important and less innocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone came from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the gentleman with the bad hat and all the other characteristics with which I have bored you. So now we must set ourselves very seriously to finding this gentleman and ascertaining what part he has played in this little mystery. To do this, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie undoubtedly in an advertisement in all the evening papers. If this fail, I shall have recourse to other methods."
"Very. But will he see it?"
"Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor man, the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mischance in breaking the window and by the approach of Peterson that he thought of nothing but flight, but since then he must have bitterly regretted the impulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, again, the introduction of his name will cause him to see it, for everyone who knows him will direct his attention to it. Here you are, Peterson, run down to the advertising agency and have this put in the evening papers."
"In which, sir?"
"Oh, in the Globe, Star, Pall Mall, St. James's, Evening News, Standard, Echo, and any others that occur to you."
"Very well, sir. And this stone?"
"Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson, just buy a goose on your way back and leave it here with me, for we must have one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which your family is now devouring."
"Do you think that this man Horner is innocent?"
"And you can do nothing until then?"
"Nothing."
"In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall come back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I should like to see the solution of so tangled a business."
"Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I believe. By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I ought to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop."
I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past six when I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I approached the house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which was buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the bright semicircle which was thrown from the fanlight. Just as I arrived the door was opened, and we were shown up together to Holmes' room.
"Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat."
"We have retained these things for some days," said Holmes, "because we expected to see an advertisement from you giving your address. I am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise."
Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. "Shillings have not been so plentiful with me as they once were," he remarked. "I had no doubt that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat and the bird. I did not care to spend more money in a hopeless attempt at recovering them."
"Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so. But I presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is about the same weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equally well?"
"Oh, certainly, certainly," answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of relief.
"So much for Mr. Henry Baker," said Holmes when he had closed the door behind him. "It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever about the matter. Are you hungry, Watson?"
"Not particularly."
"By all means."
It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrapped cravats about our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly in a cloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out into smoke like so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out crisply and loudly as we swung through the doctors' quarter, Wimpole Street, Harley Street, and so through Wigmore Street into Oxford Street. In a quarter of an hour we were in Bloomsbury at the Alpha Inn, which is a small public-house at the corner of one of the streets which runs down into Holborn. Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar and ordered two glasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.
"Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as your geese," said he.
"My geese!" The man seemed surprised.
"Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them's not our geese."
"Ah! I don't know him. Well, here's your good health landlord, and prosperity to your house. Good-night."
"Now for Mr. Breckinridge," he continued, buttoning up his coat as we came out into the frosty air. "Remember, Watson that though we have so homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at the other a man who will certainly get seven years' penal servitude unless we can establish his innocence. It is possible that our inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of investigation which has been missed by the police, and which a singular chance has placed in our hands. Let us follow it out to the bitter end. Faces to the south, then, and quick march!"
We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a zigzag of slums to Covent Garden Market. One of the largest stalls bore the name of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor a horsey-looking man, with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was helping a boy to put up the shutters.
The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at my companion.
"Let you have five hundred to-morrow morning."
"Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare."
"Who by?"
"The landlord of the Alpha."
"Now, then, mister," said he, with his head cocked and his arms akimbo, "what are you driving at? Let's have it straight, now."
"It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geese which you supplied to the Alpha."
"Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I don't know why you should be so warm over such a trifle."
"Warm! You'd be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. When I pay good money for a good article there should be an end of the business; but it's 'Where are the geese?' and 'Who did you sell the geese to?' and 'What will you take for the geese?' One would think they were the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss that is made over them."
"I say it is."
"I don't believe it."
"D'you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled them ever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that went to the Alpha were town bred."
"You'll never persuade me to believe that."
The salesman chuckled grimly. "Bring me the books, Bill," said he.
The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a great greasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanging lamp.
"That's the list of the folk from whom I buy. D'you see? Well, then, here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers after their names are where their accounts are in the big ledger. Now, then! You see this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my town suppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to me."
"Now, then, what's the last entry?"
" 'December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7s. 6d.' "
Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from his pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the air of a man whose disgust is too deep for words. A few yards off he stopped under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion which was peculiar to him.
"When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the 'Pink 'un' protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet," said he. "I daresay that if I had put $100 down in front of him, that man would not have given me such complete information as was drawn from him by the idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, we are, I fancy, nearing the end of our quest, and the only point which remains to be determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs. Oakshott to-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It is clear from what that surly fellow said that there are others besides ourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I should--"
His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke out from the stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a little rat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of yellow light which was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, the salesman, framed in the door of his stall, was shaking his fists fiercely at the cringing figure.
"I've had enough of you and your geese," he shouted. "I wish you were all at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more with your silly talk I'll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here and I'll answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geese off you?"
"No; but one of them was mine all the same," whined the little man.
"Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it."
"She told me to ask you."
"Who are you, then? What do you want?" he asked in a quavering voice.
"You will excuse me," said Holmes blandly, "but I could not help overhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now. I think that I could be of assistance to you."
"You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the matter?"
"My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what other people don't know."
"But you can know nothing of this?"
"Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet," cried the little fellow with outstretched hands and quivering fingers. "I can hardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter."
The man hesitated for an instant. "My name is John Robinson," he answered with a sidelong glance.
Ryder quivered with emotion. "Oh, sir," he cried, "can you tell me where it went to?"
"Here?"
"Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I don't wonder that you should take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead--the bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen. I have it here in my museum."
Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece with his right hand. Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up the blue carbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold, brilliant, many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glaring with a drawn face, uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.
"The game's up, Ryder," said Holmes quietly. "Hold up, man, or you'll be into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. He's not got blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash of brandy. So! Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimp it is, to be sure!"
For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy brought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring with frightened eyes at his accuser.
Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at my companion's knees. "For God's sake, have mercy!" he shrieked. "Think of my father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never went wrong before! I never will again. I swear it. I'll swear it on a Bible. Oh, don't bring it into court! For Christ's sake, don't!"
"I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, sir. Then the charge against him will break down."
"Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account of the next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the goose into the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies your only hope of safety."
"I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, and has just been serving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met me, and fell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get rid of what they stole. I knew that he would be true to me, for I knew one or two things about him; so I made up my mind to go right on to Kilburn, where he lived, and take him into my confidence. He would show me how to turn the stone into money. But how to get to him in safety? I thought of the agonies I had gone through in coming from the hotel. I might at any moment be seized and searched, and there would be the stone in my waistcoat pocket. I was leaning against the wall at the time and looking at the geese which were waddling about round my feet, and suddenly an idea came into my head which showed me how I could beat the best detective that ever lived.
"My sister had told me some weeks before that I might have the pick of her geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that she was always as good as her word. I would take my goose now, and in it I would carry my stone to Kilburn. There was a little shed in the yard, and behind this I drove one of the birds--a fine big one, white, with a barred tail. I caught it, and prying its bill open, I thrust the stone down its throat as far as my finger could reach. The bird gave a gulp, and I felt the stone pass along its gullet and down into its crop. But the creature flapped and struggled, and out came my sister to know what was the matter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose and fluttered off among the others.
" 'Whatever were you doing with that bird, Jem?' says she.
" 'Well,' said I, 'you said you'd give me one for Christmas, and I was feeling which was the fattest.'
" 'The other is a good three pound heavier,' said she, 'and we fattened it expressly for you.'
" 'Never mind. I'll have the other, and I'll take it now,' said I.
" 'Oh, just as you like,' said she, a little huffed. 'Which is it you want, then?'
" 'Where are they all, Maggie?' I cried.
" 'Gone to the dealer's, Jem.'
" 'Which dealer's?'
" 'Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.'
" 'But was there another with a barred tail?' I asked, 'the same as the one I chose?'
" 'Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed ones, and I could never tell them apart.'
And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon the stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running footfalls from the street.
"After all, Watson," said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his clay pipe, "I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies. If Horner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow will not appear against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I am commuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul. This fellow will not go wrong again; he is too terribly frightened. Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bird for life. Besides, it is the season of forgiveness. Chance has put in our way a most singular and whimsical problem, and its solution is its own reward. If you will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we will begin another investigation, in which, also a bird will be the chief feature."
"My dear fellow, I would not miss it for anything."
I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his professional investigations, and in admiring the rapid deductions, as swift as intuitions, and yet always founded on a logical basis with which he unravelled the problems which were submitted to him. I rapidly threw on my clothes and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my friend down to the sitting-room. A lady dressed in black and heavily veiled, who had been sitting in the window, rose as we entered.
"It is not cold which makes me shiver," said the woman in a low voice, changing her seat as requested.
"It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror." She raised her veil as she spoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable state of agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless frightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal. Her features and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot with premature grey, and her expression was weary and haggard. Sherlock Holmes ran her over with one of his quick, all-comprehensive glances.
"You must not fear," said he soothingly, bending forward and patting her forearm. "We shall soon set matters right, I have no doubt. You have come in by train this morning, I see."
"You know me, then?"
"There is no mystery, my dear madam," said he, smiling. "The left arm of your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven places. The marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cart which throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-hand side of the driver."
Holmes nodded his head. "The name is familiar to me," said he.
"When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner, the young widow of Major-General Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery. My sister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the time of my mother's re-marriage. She had a considerable sum of money--not less than $1000 a year--and this she bequeathed to Dr. Roylott entirely while we resided with him, with a provision that a certain annual sum should be allowed to each of us in the event of our marriage. Shortly after our return to England my mother died--she was killed eight years ago in a railway accident near Crewe. Dr. Roylott then abandoned his attempts to establish himself in practice in London and took us to live with him in the old ancestral house at Stoke Moran. The money which my mother had left was enough for all our wants, and there seemed to be no obstacle to our happiness.
"But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time. Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with our neighbours, who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back in the old family seat, he shut himself up in his house and seldom came out save to indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever might cross his path. Violence of temper approaching to mania has been hereditary in the men of the family, and in my stepfather's case it had, I believe, been intensified by his long residence in the tropics. A series of disgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in the police-court, until at last he became the terror of the village, and the folks would fly at his approach, for he is a man of immense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his anger.
"Last week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet into a stream, and it was only by paying over all the money which I could gather together that I was able to avert another public exposure. He had no friends at all save the wandering gipsies, and he would give these vagabonds leave to encamp upon the few acres of bramble-covered land which represent the family estate, and would accept in return the hospitality of their tents, wandering away with them sometimes for weeks on end. He has a passion also for Indian animals, which are sent over to him by a correspondent, and he has at this moment a cheetah and a baboon, which wander freely over his grounds and are feared by the villagers almost as much as their master.
"Your sister is dead, then?"
"It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time is seared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said, very old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in this wing are on the ground floor, the sitting-rooms being in the central block of the buildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylott's, the second my sister's, and the third my own. There is no communication between them, but they all open out into the same corridor. Do I make myself plain?"
"Perfectly so."
"The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatal night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though we knew that he had not retired to rest, for my sister was troubled by the smell of the strong Indian cigars which it was his custom to smoke. She left her room, therefore, and came into mine, where she sat for some time, chatting about her approaching wedding. At eleven o'clock she rose to leave me, but she paused at the door and looked back.
" 'Certainly not. But why?'
" 'Because during the last few nights I have always, about three in the morning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and it has awakened me. I cannot tell where it came from--perhaps from the next room, perhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask you whether you had heard it.'
" 'No, I have not. It must be those wretched gipsies in the plantation.'
" 'Very likely. And yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder that you did not hear it also.'
" 'Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.' She smiled back at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn in the lock."
"Indeed," said Holmes. "Was it your custom always to lock yourselves in at night?"
"Always."
"And why?"
"I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending misfortune impressed me. My sister and I, you will recollect, were twins, and you know how subtle are the links which bind two souls which are so closely allied. It was a wild night. The wind was howling outside, and the rain was beating and splashing against the windows. Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that it was my sister's voice. I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor. As I opened my door I seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sister described, and a few moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen. As I ran down the passage, my sister's door was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon its hinges. I stared at it horror-stricken, not knowing what was about to issue from it. By the light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sister appear at the opening, her face blanched with terror, her hands groping for help, her whole figure swaying to and fro like that of a drunkard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at that moment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. She writhed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfully convulsed. At first I thought that she had not recognised me, but as I bent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shall never forget, 'Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!' There was something else which she would fain have said, and she stabbed with her finger into the air in the direction of the doctor's room, but a fresh convulsion seized her and choked her words. I rushed out, calling loudly for my stepfather, and I met him hastening from his room in his dressing-gown. When he reached my sister's side she was unconscious, and though he poured brandy down her throat and sent for medical aid from the village, all efforts were in vain, for she slowly sank and died without having recovered her consciousness. Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sister."
"One moment," said Holmes, "are you sure about this whistle and metallic sound? Could you swear to it?"
"Was your sister dressed?"
"No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found the charred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box."
"How about poison?"
"It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, though what it was that frightened her I cannot imagine."
"Yes, there are nearly always some there."
"Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a band--a speckled band?"
"Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of delirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people, perhaps to these very gipsies in the plantation. I do not know whether the spotted handkerchiefs which so many of them wear over their heads might have suggested the strange adjective which she used."
Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.
"These are very deep waters," said he; "pray go on with your narrative."
"Two years have passed since then, and my life has been until lately lonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend, whom I have known for many years, has done me the honour to ask my hand in marriage. His name is Armitage--Percy Armitage--the second son of Mr. Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My stepfather has offered no opposition to the match, and we are to be married in the course of the spring. Two days ago some repairs were started in the west wing of the building, and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I have had to move into the chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in the very bed in which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror when last night, as I lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, I suddenly heard in the silence of the night the low whistle which had been the herald of her own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, but nothing was to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, however, so I dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got a dog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come on this morning with the one object of seeing you and asking your advice."
"You have done wisely," said my friend. "But have you told me all?"
"Yes, all."
"Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your stepfather."
For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed the hand that lay upon our visitor's knee. Five little livid spots, the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed upon the white wrist.
The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist. "He is a hard man," she said, "and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength."
There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin upon his hands and stared into the crackling fire.
"As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some most important business. It is probable that he will be away all day, and that there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a housekeeper now, but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get her out of the way."
"Excellent. You are not averse to this trip, Watson?"
"Then we shall both come. What are you going to do yourself?"
"I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am in town. But I shall return by the twelve o'clock train, so as to be there in time for your coming."
"And you may expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself some small business matters to attend to. Will you not wait and breakfast?"
"No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have confided my trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again this afternoon." She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glided from the room.
"And what do you think of it all, Watson?" asked Sherlock Holmes, leaning back in his chair.
"Dark enough and sinister enough."
"Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and walls are sound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, then her sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her mysterious end."
"I cannot think."
"When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of a band of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, the fact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has an interest in preventing his stepdaughter's marriage, the dying allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner heard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place, I think that there is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared along those lines."
"But what, then, did the gipsies do?"
"I cannot imagine."
The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that our door had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had framed himself in the aperture. His costume was a peculiar mixture of the professional and of the agricultural, having a black top-hat, a long frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop swinging in his hand. So tall was he that his hat actually brushed the cross bar of the doorway, and his breadth seemed to span it across from side to side. A large face, seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and marked with every evil passion, was turned from one to the other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin, fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old bird of prey.
"Which of you is Holmes?" asked this apparition.
"What has she been saying to you?" screamed the old man furiously.
"But I have heard that the crocuses promise well," continued my companion imperturbably.
"Ha! You put me off, do you?" said our new visitor, taking a step forward and shaking his hunting-crop. "I know you, you scoundrel! I have heard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler."
My friend smiled.
"Holmes, the busybody!"
His smile broadened.
Holmes chuckled heartily. "Your conversation is most entertaining," said he. "When you go out close the door, for there is a decided draught."
"I will go when I have said my say. Don't you dare to meddle with my affairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her! I am a dangerous man to fall foul of! See here." He stepped swiftly forward, seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown hands.
"See that you keep yourself out of my grip," he snarled, and hurling the twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the room.
"He seems a very amiable person," said Holmes, laughing. "I am not quite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him that my grip was not much more feeble than his own." As he spoke he picked up the steel poker and, with a sudden effort, straightened it out again.
"Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the official detective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation, however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer from her imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson, we shall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk down to Doctors' Commons, where I hope to get some data which may help us in this matter."
At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhead, where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove for four or five miles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a perfect day, with a bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The trees and wayside hedges were just throwing out their first green shoots, and the air was full of the pleasant smell of the moist earth. To me at least there was a strange contrast between the sweet promise of the spring and this sinister quest upon which we were engaged. My companion sat in the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down over his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the deepest thought. Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on the shoulder, and pointed over the meadows.
A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening into a grove at the highest point. From amid the branches there jutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old mansion.
"Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott," remarked the driver.
"There is some building going on there," said Holmes; "that is where we are going."
"There's the village," said the driver, pointing to a cluster of roofs some distance to the left; "but if you want to get to the house, you'll find it shorter to get over this stile, and so by the foot-path over the fields. There it is, where the lady is walking."
"And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner," observed Holmes, shading his eyes. "Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest."
We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way to Leatherhead.
"I thought it as well," said Holmes as we climbed the stile, "that this fellow should think we had come here as architects, or on some definite business. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You see that we have been as good as our word."
"We have had the pleasure of making the doctor's acquaintance," said Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred. Miss Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.
"Good heavens!" she cried, "he has followed me, then."
"He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him. What will he say when he returns?"
"Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does not seem to be any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall."
"There were none. I believe that it was an excuse to move me from my room."
"Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wing runs the corridor from which these three rooms open. There are windows in it, of course?"
"Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for anyone to pass through."
Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination through the open window, endeavoured in every way to force the shutter open, but without success. There was no slit through which a knife could be passed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, but they were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry. "Hum!" said he, scratching his chin in some perplexity, "my theory certainly presents some difficulties. No one could pass these shutters if they were bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon the matter."
A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which the three bedrooms opened. Holmes refused to examine the third chamber, so we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss Stoner was now sleeping, and in which her sister had met with her fate. It was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, after the fashion of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrow white-counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on the left-hand side of the window. These articles, with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in the room save for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boards round and the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old and discoloured that it may have dated from the original building of the house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down, taking in every detail of the apartment.
"It goes to the housekeeper's room."
"It looks newer than the other things?"
"Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago."
"No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what we wanted for ourselves."
"Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there. You will excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to this floor." He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in his hand and crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining minutely the cracks between the boards. Then he did the same with the wood-work with which the chamber was panelled. Finally he walked over to the bed and spent some time in staring at it and in running his eye up and down the wall. Finally he took the bell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.
"Why, it's a dummy," said he.
"Won't it ring?"
"Very strange!" muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. "There are one or two very singular points about this room. For example, what a fool a builder must be to open a ventilator into another room, when, with the same trouble, he might have communicated with the outside air!"
"That is also quite modern," said the lady.
"Done about the same time as the bell-rope?" remarked Holmes.
"Oh! you have seen inside, then?"
"Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers."
"There isn't a cat in it, for example?"
"No. What a strange idea!"
"Well, look at this!" He took up a small saucer of milk which stood on the top of it.
"No; we don't keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon."
The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on one corner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself and tied so as to make a loop of whipcord.
"What do you make of that, Watson?"
"That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it's a wicked world, and when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all. I think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with your permission we shall walk out upon the lawn."
I had never seen my friend's face so grim or his brow so dark as it was when we turned from the scene of this investigation. We had walked several times up and down the lawn, neither Miss Stoner nor myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused himself from his reverie.
"It is very essential, Miss Stoner," said he, "that you should absolutely follow my advice in every respect."
"I shall most certainly do so."
"The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Your life may depend upon your compliance."
"In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night in your room."
Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment.
"Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is the village inn over there?"
"Yes, that is the Crown."
"Very good. Your windows would be visible from there?"
"Certainly."
"Oh, yes, easily."
"The rest you will leave in our hands."
"But what will you do?"
"We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate the cause of this noise which has disturbed you."
"I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind," said Miss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion's sleeve.
"Perhaps I have."
"Then, for pity's sake, tell me what was the cause of my sister's death."
"No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some more tangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr. Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain. Good-bye, and be brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may rest assured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you."
"Do you know, Watson," said Holmes as we sat together in the gathering darkness, "I have really some scruples as to taking you to-night. There is a distinct element of danger."
"Can I be of assistance?"
"Then I shall certainly come."
"You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these rooms than was visible to me."
"No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imagine that you saw all that I did."
"I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose that could answer I confess is more than I can imagine."
"Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to have a small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat could hardly pass through."
"My dear Holmes!"
"Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her sister could smell Dr. Roylott's cigar. Now, of course that suggested at once that there must be a communication between the two rooms. It could only be a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at the coroner's inquiry. I deduced a ventilator."
"But what harm can there be in that?"
"I cannot as yet see any connection."
"No."
"Holmes," I cried, "I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. We are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime."
"Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he is the first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer and Pritchard were among the heads of their profession. This man strikes even deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strike deeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the night is over; for goodness' sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our minds for a few hours to something more cheerful."
"That is our signal," said Holmes, springing to his feet; "it comes from the middle window."
"My God!" I whispered; "did you see it?"
Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like a vice upon my wrist in his agitation. Then he broke into a low laugh and put his lips to my ear.
"It is a nice household," he murmured. "That is the baboon."
I had forgotten the strange pets which the doctor affected. There was a cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at any moment. I confess that I felt easier in my mind when, after following Holmes' example and slipping off my shoes, I found myself inside the bedroom. My companion noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the lamp onto the table, and cast his eyes round the room. All was as we had seen it in the daytime. Then creeping up to me and making a trumpet of his hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently that it was all that I could do to distinguish the words:
"The least sound would be fatal to our plans."
"We must sit without light. He would see it through the ventilator."
I nodded again.
"Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistol ready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the bed, and you in that chair."
Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon the bed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of a candle. Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left in darkness.
How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a sound, not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my companion sat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same state of nervous tension in which I was myself. The shutters cut off the least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.
From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once at our very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that the cheetah was indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear the deep tones of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an hour. How long they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and one and two and three, and still we sat waiting silently for whatever might befall.
Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the direction of the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded by a strong smell of burning oil and heated metal. Someone in the next room had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle sound of movement, and then all was silent once more, though the smell grew stronger. For half an hour I sat with straining ears. Then suddenly another sound became audible--a very gentle, soothing sound, like that of a small jet of steam escaping continually from a kettle. The instant that we heard it, Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously with his cane at the bell-pull.
"You see it, Watson?" he yelled. "You see it?"
"What can it mean?" I gasped.
"It means that it is all over," Holmes answered. "And perhaps, after all, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr. Roylott's room."
With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor. Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply from within. Then he turned the handle and entered, I at his heels, with the cocked pistol in my hand.
It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a dark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam of light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar. Beside this table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a long grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feet thrust into red heelless Turkish slippers. Across his lap lay the short stock with the long lash which we had noticed during the day. His chin was cocked upward and his eyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare at the corner of the ceiling. Round his brow he had a peculiar yellow band, with brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round his head. As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.
"The band! the speckled band!" whispered Holmes.
I took a step forward. In an instant his strange headgear began to move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squat diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.
"It is a swamp adder!" cried Holmes; "the deadliest snake in India. He has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls into the pit which he digs for another. Let us thrust this creature back into its den, and we can then remove Miss Stoner to some place of shelter and let the county police know what has happened."
Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran. It is not necessary that I should prolong a narrative which has already run to too great a length by telling how we broke the sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyed her by the morning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slow process of official inquiry came to the conclusion that the doctor met his fate while indiscreetly playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I had yet to learn of the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled back next day.
"I had," said he, "come to an entirely erroneous conclusion which shows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason from insufficient data. The presence of the gipsies, and the use of the word 'band,' which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, to explain the appearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of by the light of her match, were sufficient to put me upon an entirely wrong scent. I can only claim the merit that I instantly reconsidered my position when, however, it became clear to me that whatever danger threatened an occupant of the room could not come either from the window or the door. My attention was speedily drawn, as I have already remarked to you, to this ventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to the bed. The discovery that this was a dummy, and that the bed was clamped to the floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope was there as a bridge for something passing through the hole and coming to the bed. The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me, and when I coupled it with my knowledge that the doctor was furnished with a supply of creatures from India, I felt that I was probably on the right track. The idea of using a form of poison which could not possibly be discovered by any chemical test was just such a one as would occur to a clever and ruthless man who had had an Eastern training. The rapidity with which such a poison would take effect would also, from his point of view, be an advantage. It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who could distinguish the two little dark punctures which would show where the poison fangs had done their work. Then I thought of the whistle. Of course he must recall the snake before the morning light revealed it to the victim. He had trained it, probably by the use of the milk which we saw, to return to him when summoned. He would put it through this ventilator at the hour that he thought best, with the certainty that it would crawl down the rope and land on the bed. It might or might not bite the occupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, but sooner or later she must fall a victim.
"I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room. An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit of standing on it, which of course would be necessary in order that he should reach the ventilator. The sight of the safe, the saucer of milk, and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally dispel any doubts which may have remained. The metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner was obviously caused by her stepfather hastily closing the door of his safe upon its terrible occupant. Having once made up my mind, you know the steps which I took in order to put the matter to the proof. I heard the creature hiss as I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly lit the light and attacked it."
One morning, at a little before seven o'clock, I was awakened by the maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had come from Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I dressed hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases were seldom trivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended, my old ally, the guard, came out of the room and closed the door tightly behind him.
"I've got him here," he whispered, jerking his thumb over his shoulder; "he's all right."
I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by the table. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a soft cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of his hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all over with bloodstains. He was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong, masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale and gave me the impression of a man who was suffering from some strong agitation, which it took all his strength of mind to control.
I took it up and glanced at it. "Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulic engineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor)." That was the name, style, and abode of my morning visitor. "I regret that I have kept you waiting," said I, sitting down in my library-chair. "You are fresh from a night journey, I understand, which is in itself a monotonous occupation."
"Oh, my night could not be called monotonous," said he, and laughed. He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in his chair and shaking his sides. All my medical instincts rose up against that laugh.
"I have been making a fool of myself," he gasped.
"Not at all. Drink this." I dashed some brandy into the water, and the colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.
He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even my hardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four protruding fingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb should have been. It had been hacked or torn right out from the roots.
"Excellent! You should have been a surgeon."
"It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my own province."
"A thing like a cleaver," said he.
"An accident, I presume?"
"By no means."
"What! a murderous attack?"
"You horrify me."
"How is that?" I asked when I had finished.
"Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter. It is evidently trying to your nerves."
"Ha!" cried I, "if it is anything in the nature of a problem which you desire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come to my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the official police."
"We'll call a cab and go together. We shall just be in time to have a little breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?"
"Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story."
Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his sitting-room in his dressing-gown, reading the agony column of The Times and smoking his before-breakfast pipe, which was composed of all the plugs and dottles left from his smokes of the day before, all carefully dried and collected on the corner of the mantelpiece. He received us in his quietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers and eggs, and joined us in a hearty meal. When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintance upon the sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass of brandy and water within his reach.
"Thank you," said my patient. "but I have felt another man since the doctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has completed the cure. I shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, so I shall start at once upon my peculiar experiences."
Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded expression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat opposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange story which our visitor detailed to us.
"You must know," said he, "that I am an orphan and a bachelor, residing alone in lodgings in London. By profession I am a hydraulic engineer, and I have had considerable experience of my work during the seven years that I was apprenticed to Venner & Matheson, the well-known firm, of Greenwich. Two years ago, having served my time, and having also come into a fair sum of money through my poor father's death, I determined to start in business for myself and took professional chambers in Victoria Street.
"Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving the office, my clerk entered to say there was a gentleman waiting who wished to see me upon business. He brought up a card, too, with the name of 'Colonel Lysander Stark' engraved upon it. Close at his heels came the colonel himself, a man rather over the middle size, but of an exceeding thinness. I do not think that I have ever seen so thin a man. His whole face sharpened away into nose and chin, and the skin of his cheeks was drawn quite tense over his outstanding bones. Yet this emaciation seemed to be his natural habit, and due to no disease, for his eye was bright, his step brisk, and his bearing assured. He was plainly but neatly dressed, and his age, I should judge, would be nearer forty than thirty.
"I bowed, feeling as flattered as any young man would at such an address. 'May I ask who it was who gave me so good a character?'
" 'That is quite correct,' I answered; 'but you will excuse me if I say that I cannot see how all this bears upon my professional qualifications. I understand that it was on a professional matter that you wished to speak to me?'
" 'If I promise to keep a secret,' said I, 'you may absolutely depend upon my doing so.'
"He looked very hard at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I had never seen so suspicious and questioning an eye.
" 'Do you promise, then?' said he at last.
" 'I have already given you my word.'
" 'Very good.' He suddenly sprang up, and darting like lightning across the room he flung open the door. The passage outside was empty.
" 'I beg that you will state your business, sir,' said I; 'my time is of value.' Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but the words came to my lips.
" 'How would fifty guineas for a night's work suit you?' he asked.
" 'Most admirably.'
" 'I say a night's work, but an hour's would be nearer the mark. I simply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine which has got out of gear. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set it right ourselves. What do you think of such a commission as that?'
" 'Where to?'
" 'To Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the borders of Oxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading. There is a train from Paddington which would bring you there at about 11:15.'
" 'There is a drive, then?'
" 'Yes, our little place is quite out in the country. It is a good seven miles from Eyford Station.'
" 'Then we can hardly get there before midnight. I suppose there would be no chance of a train back. I should be compelled to stop the night.'
" 'Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.'
" 'We have judged it best that you should come late. It is to recompense you for any inconvenience that we are paying to you, a young and unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the very heads of your profession. Still, of course, if you would like to draw out of the business, there is plenty of time to do so.'
" 'Then the matter stands thus. You are probably aware that fuller's-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only found in one or two places in England?'
" 'Some little time ago I bought a small place--a very small place--within ten miles of Reading. I was fortunate enough to discover that there was a deposit of fuller's-earth in one of my fields. On examining it, however, I found that this deposit was a comparatively small one, and that it formed a link between two very much larger ones upon the right and left--both of them, however, in the grounds of my neighbours. These good people were absolutely ignorant that their land contained that which was quite as valuable as a gold-mine. Naturally, it was to my interest to buy their land before they discovered its true value, but unfortunately I had no capital by which I could do this. I took a few of my friends into the secret, however, and they suggested that we should quietly and secretly work our own little deposit and that in this way we should earn the money which would enable us to buy the neighbouring fields. This we have now been doing for some time, and in order to help us in our operations we erected a hydraulic press. This press, as I have already explained, has got out of order, and we wish your advice upon the subject. We guard our secret very jealously, however, and if it once became known that we had hydraulic engineers coming to our little house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and then, if the facts came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting these fields and carrying out our plans. That is why I have made you promise me that you will not tell a human being that you are going to Eyford to-night. I hope that I make it all plain?'
" 'I quite follow you,' said I. 'The only point which I could not quite understand was what use you could make of a hydraulic press in excavating fuller's-earth, which, as I understand, is dug out like gravel from a pit.'
" 'I shall certainly be there.'
"Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was very much astonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commission which had been intrusted to me. On the one hand, of course, I was glad, for the fee was at least tenfold what I should have asked had I set a price upon my own services, and it was possible that this order might lead to other ones. On the other hand, the face and manner of my patron had made an unpleasant impression upon me, and I could not think that his explanation of the fuller's-earth was sufficient to explain the necessity for my coming at midnight, and his extreme anxiety lest I should tell anyone of my errand. However, I threw all fears to the winds, ate a hearty supper, drove to Paddington, and started off, having obeyed to the letter the injunction as to holding my tongue.
"At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my station. However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and I reached the little dim-lit station after eleven o'clock. I was the only passenger who got out there, and there was no one upon the platform save a single sleepy porter with a lantern. As I passed out through the wicket gate, however, I found my acquaintance of the morning waiting in the shadow upon the other side. Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried me into a carriage, the door of which was standing open. He drew up the windows on either side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we went as fast as the horse could go."
"One horse?" interjected Holmes.
"Tired-looking or fresh?"
"Oh, fresh and glossy."
"Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour. Colonel Lysander Stark had said that it was only seven miles, but I should think, from the rate that we seemed to go, and from the time that we took, that it must have been nearer twelve. He sat at my side in silence all the time, and I was aware, more than once when I glanced in his direction, that he was looking at me with great intensity. The country roads seem to be not very good in that part of the world, for we lurched and jolted terribly. I tried to look out of the windows to see something of where we were, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could make out nothing save the occasional bright blur of a passing light. Now and then I hazarded some remark to break the monotony of the journey, but the colonel answered only in monosyllables, and the conversation soon flagged. At last, however, the bumping of the road was exchanged for the crisp smoothness of a gravel-drive, and the carriage came to a stand. Colonel Lysander Stark sprang out, and, as I followed after him, pulled me swiftly into a porch which gaped in front of us. We stepped, as it were, right out of the carriage and into the hall, so that I failed to catch the most fleeting glance of the front of the house. The instant that I had crossed the threshold the door slammed heavily behind us, and I heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as the carriage drove away.
"It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled about looking for matches and muttering under his breath. Suddenly a door opened at the other end of the passage, and a long, golden bar of light shot out in our direction. It grew broader, and a woman appeared with a lamp in her hand, which she held above her head, pushing her face forward and peering at us. I could see that she was pretty, and from the gloss with which the light shone upon her dark dress I knew that it was a rich material. She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in a tone as though asking a question, and when my companion answered in a gruff monosyllable she gave such a start that the lamp nearly fell from her hand. Colonel Stark went up to her, whispered something in her ear, and then, pushing her back into the room from whence she had come, he walked towards me again with the lamp in his hand.
" 'It is not worth your while to wait,' she went on. 'You can pass through the door; no one hinders.' And then, seeing that I smiled and shook my head, she suddenly threw aside her constraint and made a step forward, with her hands wrung together. 'For the love of Heaven!' she whispered, 'get away from here before it is too late!'
" 'This is my secretary and manager,' said the colonel. 'By the way, I was under the impression that I left this door shut just now. I fear that you have felt the draught.'
"He shot one of his suspicious looks at me. 'Perhaps we had better proceed to business, then,' said he. 'Mr. Ferguson and I will take you up to see the machine.'
"We went upstairs together, the colonel first with the lamp, the fat manager and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, with corridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and little low doors, the thresholds of which were hollowed out by the generations who had crossed them. There were no carpets and no signs of any furniture above the ground floor, while the plaster was peeling off the walls, and the damp was breaking through in green, unhealthy blotches. I tried to put on as unconcerned an air as possible, but I had not forgotten the warnings of the lady, even though I disregarded them, and I kept a keen eye upon my two companions. Ferguson appeared to be a morose and silent man, but I could see from the little that he said that he was at least a fellow-countryman.
"I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine very thoroughly. It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercising enormous pressure. When I passed outside, however, and pressed down the levers which controlled it, I knew at once by the whishing sound that there was a slight leakage, which allowed a regurgitation of water through one of the side cylinders. An examination showed that one of the india-rubber bands which was round the head of a driving-rod had shrunk so as not quite to fill the socket along which it worked. This was clearly the cause of the loss of power, and I pointed it out to my companions, who followed my remarks very carefully and asked several practical questions as to how they should proceed to set it right. When I had made it clear to them, I returned to the main chamber of the machine and took a good look at it to satisfy my own curiosity. It was obvious at a glance that the story of the fuller's-earth was the merest fabrication, for it would be absurd to suppose that so powerful an engine could be designed for so inadequate a purpose. The walls were of wood, but the floor consisted of a large iron trough, and when I came to examine it I could see a crust of metallic deposit all over it. I had stooped and was scraping at this to see exactly what it was when I heard a muttered exclamation in German and saw the cadaverous face of the colonel looking down at me.
"I felt angry at having been tricked by so elaborate a story as that which he had told me. 'I was admiring your fuller's-earth,' said I; 'I think that I should be better able to advise you as to your machine if I knew what the exact purpose was for which it was used.'
"The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness of my speech. His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up in his grey eyes.
" 'Very well,' said he, 'you shall know all about the machine.' He took a step backward, slammed the little door, and turned the key in the lock. I rushed towards it and pulled at the handle, but it was quite secure, and did not give in the least to my kicks and shoves. 'Hullo!' I yelled. 'Hullo! Colonel! Let me out!'
"And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent my heart into my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the swish of the leaking cylinder. He had set the engine at work. The lamp still stood upon the floor where I had placed it when examining the trough. By its light I saw that the black ceiling was coming down upon me, slowly, jerkily, but, as none knew better than myself, with a force which must within a minute grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threw myself, screaming, against the door, and dragged with my nails at the lock. I implored the colonel to let me out, but the remorseless clanking of the levers drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a foot or two above my head, and with my hand upraised I could feel its hard, rough surface. Then it flashed through my mind that the pain of my death would depend very much upon the position in which I met it. If I lay on my face the weight would come upon my spine, and I shuddered to think of that dreadful snap. Easier the other way, perhaps; and yet, had I the nerve to lie and look up at that deadly black shadow wavering down upon me? Already I was unable to stand erect, when my eye caught something which brought a gush of hope back to my heart.
" 'Come! come!' she cried breathlessly. 'They will be here in a moment. They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste the so-precious time, but come!'
"This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice. I staggered to my feet and ran with her along the corridor and down a winding stair. The latter led to another broad passage, and just as we reached it we heard the sound of running feet and the shouting of two voices, one answering the other from the floor on which we were and from the one beneath. My guide stopped and looked about her like one who is at her wit's end. Then she threw open a door which led into a bedroom, through the window of which the moon was shining brightly.
" 'It is your only chance,' said she. 'It is high, but it may be that you can jump it.'
"As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of the passage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark rushing forward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like a butcher's cleaver in the other. I rushed across the bedroom, flung open the window, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and wholesome the garden looked in the moonlight, and it could not be more than thirty feet down. I clambered out upon the sill, but I hesitated to jump until I should have heard what passed between my saviour and the ruffian who pursued me. If she were ill-used, then at any risks I was determined to go back to her assistance. The thought had hardly flashed through my mind before he was at the door, pushing his way past her; but she threw her arms round him and tried to hold him back.
" 'Fritz! Fritz!' she cried in English, 'remember your promise after the last time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent! Oh, he will be silent!'
"Good heavens!" cried my patient. "Then that explains what the girl said."
"There you are," said he. "That circle is drawn at a radius of ten miles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near that line. You said ten miles, I think, sir."
"It was an hour's good drive."
"And you think that they brought you back all that way when you were unconscious?"
"They must have done so. I have a confused memory, too, of having been lifted and conveyed somewhere."
"I think I could lay my finger on it," said Holmes quietly.
"Really, now!" cried the inspector, "you have formed your opinion! Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, for the country is more deserted there."
"I am for west," remarked the plain-clothes man. "There are several quiet little villages up there."
"You are all wrong."
"Oh, yes, you can. This is my point." He placed his finger in the centre of the circle. "This is where we shall find them."
"But the twelve-mile drive?" gasped Hatherley.
"Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that the horse was fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it had gone twelve miles over heavy roads?"
"None at all," said Holmes. "They are coiners on a large scale, and have used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken the place of silver."
"We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work," said the inspector. "They have been turning out half-crowns by the thousand. We even traced them as far as Reading, but could get no farther, for they had covered their traces in a way that showed that they were very old hands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I think that we have got them right enough."
But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not destined to fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into Eyford Station we saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed up from behind a small clump of trees in the neighbourhood and hung like an immense ostrich feather over the landscape.
"A house on fire?" asked Bradstreet as the train steamed off again on its way.
"Yes, sir!" said the station-master.
"I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse, and the whole place is in a blaze."
"Whose house is it?"
"Dr. Becher's."
The station-master laughed heartily. "No, sir, Dr. Becher is an Englishman, and there isn't a man in the parish who has a better-lined waistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, as I understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if a little good Berkshire beef would do him no harm."
"Well, at least," said Holmes, "you have had your revenge upon them. There can be no question that it was your oil-lamp which, when it was crushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls, though no doubt they were too excited in the chase after you to observe it at the time. Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of last night, though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off by now."
And Holmes' fears came to be realised, for from that day to this no word has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the sinister German, or the morose Englishman. Early that morning a peasant had met a cart containing several people and some very bulky boxes driving rapidly in the direction of Reading, but there all traces of the fugitives disappeared, and even Holmes' ingenuity failed ever to discover the least clue as to their whereabouts.
The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangements which they had found within, and still more so by discovering a newly severed human thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor. About sunset, however, their efforts were at last successful, and they subdued the flames, but not before the roof had fallen in, and the whole place been reduced to such absolute ruin that, save some twisted cylinders and iron piping, not a trace remained of the machinery which had cost our unfortunate acquaintance so dearly. Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered stored in an out-house, but no coins were to be found, which may have explained the presence of those bulky boxes which have been already referred to.
How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden to the spot where he recovered his senses might have remained forever a mystery were it not for the soft mould, which told us a very plain tale. He had evidently been carried down by two persons, one of whom had remarkably small feet and the other unusually large ones. On the whole, it was most probable that the silent Englishman, being less bold or less murderous than his companion, had assisted the woman to bear the unconscious man out of the way of danger.
"Well," said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to return once more to London, "it has been a pretty business for me! I have lost my thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I gained?"
"Experience," said Holmes, laughing. "Indirectly it may be of value, you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputation of being excellent company for the remainder of your existence."
The Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, have long ceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circles in which the unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh scandals have eclipsed it, and their more piquant details have drawn the gossips away from this four-year-old drama. As I have reason to believe, however, that the full facts have never been revealed to the general public, and as my friend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in clearing the matter up, I feel that no memoir of him would be complete without some little sketch of this remarkable episode.
It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when I was still sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came home from an afternoon stroll to find a letter on the table waiting for him. I had remained indoors all day, for the weather had taken a sudden turn to rain, with high autumnal winds, and the Jezail bullet which I had brought back in one of my limbs as a relic of my Afghan campaign throbbed with dull persistence. With my body in one easy-chair and my legs upon another, I had surrounded myself with a cloud of newspapers until at last, saturated with the news of the day, I tossed them all aside and lay listless, watching the huge crest and monogram upon the envelope upon the table and wondering lazily who my friend's noble correspondent could be.
"Here is a very fashionable epistle," I remarked as he entered. "Your morning letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-monger and a tide-waiter."
"Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety," he answered, smiling, "and the humbler are usually the more interesting. This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call upon a man either to be bored or to lie."
He broke the seal and glanced over the contents.
"Oh, come, it may prove to be something of interest, after all."
"Not social, then?"
"One of the highest in England."
"My dear fellow, I congratulate you."
"I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of my client is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of his case. It is just possible, however, that that also may not be wanting in this new investigation. You have been reading the papers diligently of late, have you not?"
"It looks like it," said I ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in the corner. "I have had nothing else to do."
"It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. I read nothing except the criminal news and the agony column. The latter is always instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closely you must have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding?"
"That is well. The letter which I hold in my hand is from Lord St. Simon. I will read it to you, and in return you must turn over these papers and let me have whatever bears upon the matter. This is what he says:
" 'MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES:--Lord Backwater tells me that I may place implicit reliance upon your judgment and discretion. I have determined, therefore, to call upon you and to consult you in reference to the very painful event which has occurred in connection with my wedding. Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, is acting already in the matter, but he assures me that he sees no objection to your co-operation, and that he even thinks that it might be of some assistance. I will call at four o'clock in the afternoon, and, should you have any other engagement at that time, I hope that you will postpone it, as this matter is of paramount importance. Yours faithfully,
"It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and the noble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outer side of his right little finger," remarked Holmes as he folded up the epistle.
"Then I have just time, with your assistance, to get clear upon the subject. Turn over those papers and arrange the extracts in their order of time, while I take a glance as to who our client is." He picked a red-covered volume from a line of books of reference beside the mantelpiece. "Here he is," said he, sitting down and flattening it out upon his knee. " 'Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral.' Hum! 'Arms: Azure, three caltrops in chief over a fess sable. Born in 1846.' He's forty-one years of age, which is mature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary for the colonies in a late administration. The Duke, his father, was at one time Secretary for Foreign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, and Tudor on the distaff side. Ha! Well, there is nothing very instructive in all this. I think that I must turn to you Watson, for something more solid."
"Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniture van. That is quite cleared up now--though, indeed, it was obvious from the first. Pray give me the results of your newspaper selections."
"Here is the first notice which I can find. It is in the personal column of the Morning Post, and dates, as you see, some weeks back: 'A marriage has been arranged,' it says, 'and will, if rumour is correct, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only daughter of Aloysius Doran. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.' That is all."
"There was a paragraph amplifying this in one of the society papers of the same week. Ah, here it is: 'There will soon be a call for protection in the marriage market, for the present free-trade principle appears to tell heavily against our home product. One by one the management of the noble houses of Great Britain is passing into the hands of our fair cousins from across the Atlantic. An important addition has been made during the last week to the list of the prizes which have been borne away by these charming invaders. Lord St. Simon, who has shown himself for over twenty years proof against the little god's arrows, has now definitely announced his approaching marriage with Miss Hatty Doran, the fascinating daughter of a California millionaire. Miss Doran, whose graceful figure and striking face attracted much attention at the Westbury House festivities, is an only child, and it is currently reported that her dowry will run to considerably over the six figures, with expectancies for the future. As it is an open secret that the Duke of Balmoral has been compelled to sell his pictures within the last few years, and as Lord St. Simon has no property of his own save the small estate of Birchmoor, it is obvious that the Californian heiress is not the only gainer by an alliance which will enable her to make the easy and common transition from a Republican lady to a British peeress.' "
"Oh, yes; plenty. Then there is another note in the Morning Post to say that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it would be at St. George's, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen intimate friends would be invited, and that the party would return to the furnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr. Aloysius Doran. Two days later--that is, on Wednesday last--there is a curt announcement that the wedding had taken place, and that the honeymoon would be passed at Lord Backwater's place, near Petersfield. Those are all the notices which appeared before the disappearance of the bride."
"Before the what?" asked Holmes with a start.
"The vanishing of the lady."
"When did she vanish, then?"
"At the wedding breakfast."
"Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common."
"I warn you that they are very incomplete."
"Perhaps we may make them less so."
"Only one little item in another of the morning papers, but it is a suggestive one."
"That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, has actually been arrested. It appears that she was formerly a danseuse at the Allegro, and that she has known the bridegroom for some years. There are no further particulars, and the whole case is in your hands now--so far as it has been set forth in the public press."
"A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr. Holmes. I have been cut to the quick. I understand that you have already managed several delicate cases of this sort, sir, though I presume that they were hardly from the same class of society."
"I beg pardon."
"Oh, really! I had no idea. And which king?"
"What! Had he lost his wife?"
"You can understand," said Holmes suavely, "that I extend to the affairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to you in yours."
"Of course! Very right! very right! I'm sure I beg pardon. As to my own case, I am ready to give you any information which may assist you in forming an opinion."
"Thank you. I have already learned all that is in the public prints, nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correct--this article, for example, as to the disappearance of the bride."
Lord St. Simon glanced over it. "Yes, it is correct, as far as it goes."
"But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone could offer an opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most directly by questioning you."
"Pray do so."
"In San Francisco, a year ago."
"You were travelling in the States?"
"Yes."
"No."
"But you were on a friendly footing?"
"I was amused by her society, and she could see that I was amused."
"Her father is very rich?"
"He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope."
"And how did he make his money?"
"Now, what is your own impression as to the young lady's--your wife's character?"
The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down into the fire. "You see, Mr. Holmes," said he, "my wife was twenty before her father became a rich man. During that time she ran free in a mining camp and wandered through woods or mountains, so that her education has come from Nature rather than from the schoolmaster. She is what we call in England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild and free, unfettered by any sort of traditions. She is impetuous--volcanic, I was about to say. She is swift in making up her mind and fearless in carrying out her resolutions. On the other hand, I would not have given her the name which I have the honour to bear"--he gave a little stately cough--"had I not thought her to be at bottom a noble woman. I believe that she is capable of heroic self-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable would be repugnant to her."
"The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed your acquaintance?"
"Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season. I met her several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her."
"She brought, I understand, a considerable dowry?"
"And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is a fait accompli?"
"I really have made no inquiries on the subject."
"Yes."
"Never better. She kept talking of what we should do in our future lives."
"She was as bright as possible--at least until after the ceremony."
"And did you observe any change in her then?"
"Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had ever seen that her temper was just a little sharp. The incident however, was too trivial to relate and can have no possible bearing upon the case."
"Pray let us have it, for all that."
"Indeed! You say that there was a gentleman in the pew. Some of the general public were present, then?"
"Oh, yes. It is impossible to exclude them when the church is open."
"This gentleman was not one of your wife's friends?"
"Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wedding in a less cheerful frame of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-entering her father's house?"
"I saw her in conversation with her maid."
"Alice is her name. She is an American and came from California with her."
"Lady St. Simon said something about 'jumping a claim.' She was accustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she meant."
"American slang is very expressive sometimes. And what did your wife do when she finished speaking to her maid?"
"She walked into the breakfast-room."
"On your arm?"
"No, alone. She was very independent in little matters like that. Then, after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose hurriedly, muttered some words of apology, and left the room. She never came back."
"But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to her room, covered her bride's dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet, and went out."
"Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park in company with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and who had already made a disturbance at Mr. Doran's house that morning."
"Did your wife hear all this?"
"And she was seen walking with this very woman afterwards?"
"Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as so serious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid some terrible trap for her."
"Well, it is a possible supposition."
"Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of characters. Pray what is your own theory as to what took place?"
"Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I have given you all the facts. Since you ask me, however, I may say that it has occurred to me as possible that the excitement of this affair, the consciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, had the effect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife."
"In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?"
"Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back--I will not say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to without success--I can hardly explain it in any other fashion."
"We could see the other side of the road and the Park."
"Quite so. Then I do not think that I need to detain you longer. I shall communicate with you."
"Eh? What was that?"
"I say that I have solved it."
"That is a detail which I shall speedily supply."
"It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by putting it on a level with his own," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "I think that I shall have a whisky and soda and a cigar after all this cross-questioning. I had formed my conclusions as to the case before our client came into the room."
"My dear Holmes!"
"I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I remarked before, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served to turn my conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence is occasionally very convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk, to quote Thoreau's example."
"But I have heard all that you have heard."
"Without, however, the knowledge of pre-existing cases which serves me so well. There was a parallel instance in Aberdeen some years back, and something on very much the same lines at Munich the year after the Franco-Prussian War. It is one of these cases--but, hullo, here is Lestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra tumbler upon the sideboard, and there are cigars in the box."
"And I feel dissatisfied. It is this infernal St. Simon marriage case. I can make neither head nor tail of the business."
"Really! You surprise me."
"Who ever heard of such a mixed affair? Every clue seems to slip through my fingers. I have been at work upon it all day."
"Yes, I have been dragging the Serpentine."
"In heaven's name, what for?"
"In search of the body of Lady St. Simon."
Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.
"Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?" he asked.
"Why? What do you mean?"
Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. "I suppose you know all about it," he snarled.
"Oh, indeed! Then you think that the Serpentine plays no part in the matter?"
"Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this in it?" He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto the floor a wedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes and a bride's wreath and veil, all discoloured and soaked in water. "There," said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon the top of the pile. "There is a little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes."
"No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper. They have been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if the clothes were there the body would not be far off."
"By the same brilliant reasoning, every man's body is to be found in the neighbourhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you hope to arrive at through this?"
"At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in the disappearance."
"I am afraid that you will find it difficult."
"In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In the card-case is a note. And here is the very note." He slapped it down upon the table in front of him. "Listen to this: 'You will see me when all is ready. Come at once. F. H. M.' Now my theory all along has been that Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Flora Millar, and that she, with confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her disappearance. Here, signed with her initials, is the very note which was no doubt quietly slipped into her hand at the door and which lured her within their reach."
"Ha! you find it so?"
"Extremely so. I congratulate you warmly."
"On the contrary, this is the right side."
"And over here is what appears to be the fragment of a hotel bill, which interests me deeply."
"There's nothing in it. I looked at it before," said Lestrade. " 'Oct. 4th, rooms 8s., breakfast 2s. 6d., cocktail 1s., lunch 2s. 6d., glass sherry, 8d.' I see nothing in that."
"Very likely not. It is most important, all the same. As to the note, it is important also, or at least the initials are, so I congratulate you again."
"Just one hint to you, Lestrade," drawled Holmes before his rival vanished; "I will tell you the true solution of the matter. Lady St. Simon is a myth. There is not, and there never has been, any such person."
Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me, tapped his forehead three times, shook his head solemnly, and hurried away.
"They have laid the supper, then," he said, rubbing his hands.
"My messenger reached you, then?" asked Holmes.
"The best possible."
Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed his hand over his forehead.
"What will the Duke say," he murmured, "when he hears that one of the family has been subjected to such humiliation?"
"It is the purest accident. I cannot allow that there is any humiliation."
"I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can hardly see how the lady could have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of doing it was undoubtedly to be regretted. Having no mother, she had no one to advise her at such a crisis."
"You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in so unprecedented a position."
At the sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from his seat and stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrust into the breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity. The lady had taken a quick step forward and had held out her hand to him, but he still refused to raise his eyes. It was as well for his resolution, perhaps, for her pleading face was one which it was hard to resist.
"Pray make no apology to me," said Lord St. Simon bitterly.
"Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave the room while you explain this matter?"
"The next I heard of Frank was that he was in Montana, and then he went prospecting in Arizona, and then I heard of him from New Mexico. After that came a long newspaper story about how a miners' camp had been attacked by Apache Indians, and there was my Frank's name among the killed. I fainted dead away, and I was very sick for months after. Pa thought I had a decline and took me to half the doctors in 'Frisco. Not a word of news came for a year and more, so that I never doubted that Frank was really dead. Then Lord St. Simon came to 'Frisco, and we came to London, and a marriage was arranged, and Pa was very pleased, but I felt all the time that no man on this earth would ever take the place in my heart that had been given to my poor Frank.
"Still, if I had married Lord St. Simon, of course I'd have done my duty by him. We can't command our love, but we can our actions. I went to the altar with him with the intention to make him just as good a wife as it was in me to be. But you may imagine what I felt when, just as I came to the altar rails, I glanced back and saw Frank standing and looking at me out of the first pew. I thought it was his ghost at first; but when I looked again there he was still, with a kind of question in his eyes, as if to ask me whether I were glad or sorry to see him. I wonder I didn't drop. I know that everything was turning round, and the words of the clergyman were just like the buzz of a bee in my ear. I didn't know what to do. Should I stop the service and make a scene in the church? I glanced at him again, and he seemed to know what I was thinking, for he raised his finger to his lips to tell me to be still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece of paper, and I knew that he was writing me a note. As I passed his pew on the way out I dropped my bouquet over to him, and he slipped the note into my hand when he returned me the flowers. It was only a line asking me to join him when he made the sign to me to do so. Of course I never doubted for a moment that my first duty was now to him, and I determined to do just whatever he might direct.
"When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, and had always been his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to get a few things packed and my ulster ready. I know I ought to have spoken to Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before his mother and all those great people. I just made up my mind to run away and explain afterwards. I hadn't been at the table ten minutes before I saw Frank out of the window at the other side of the road. He beckoned to me and then began walking into the Park. I slipped out, put on my things, and followed him. Some woman came talking something or other about Lord St. Simon to me--seemed to me from the little I heard as if he had a little secret of his own before marriage also--but I managed to get away from her and soon overtook Frank. We got into a cab together, and away we drove to some lodgings he had taken in Gordon Square, and that was my true wedding after all those years of waiting. Frank had been a prisoner among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to 'Frisco, found that I had given him up for dead and had gone to England, followed me there, and had come upon me at last on the very morning of my second wedding."
"Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was all for openness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I should like to vanish away and never see any of them again--just sending a line to Pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awful to me to think of all those lords and ladies sitting round that breakfast-table and waiting for me to come back. So Frank took my wedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them, so that I should not be traced, and dropped them away somewhere where no one could find them. It is likely that we should have gone on to Paris to-morrow, only that this good gentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round to us this evening, though how he found us is more than I can think, and he showed us very clearly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right, and that we should be putting ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret. Then he offered to give us a chance of talking to Lord St. Simon alone, and so we came right away round to his rooms at once. Now, Robert, you have heard it all, and I am very sorry if I have given you pain, and I hope that you do not think very meanly of me."
"Then you won't forgive me? You won't shake hands before I go?"
"Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure." He put out his hand and coldly grasped that which she extended to him.
"I had hoped," suggested Holmes, "that you would have joined us in a friendly supper."
"I think that there you ask a little too much," responded his Lordship. "I may be forced to acquiesce in these recent developments, but I can hardly be expected to make merry over them. I think that with your permission I will now wish you all a very good-night." He included us all in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room.
"Then I trust that you at least will honour me with your company," said Sherlock Holmes. "It is always a joy to meet an American, Mr. Moulton, for I am one of those who believe that the folly of a monarch and the blundering of a minister in far-gone years will not prevent our children from being some day citizens of the same world-wide country under a flag which shall be a quartering of the Union Jack with the Stars and Stripes."
"You were not yourself at fault at all, then?"
"From the first, two facts were very obvious to me, the one that the lady had been quite willing to undergo the wedding ceremony, the other that she had repented of it within a few minutes of returning home. Obviously something had occurred during the morning, then, to cause her to change her mind. What could that something be? She could not have spoken to anyone when she was out, for she had been in the company of the bridegroom. Had she seen someone, then? If she had, it must be someone from America because she had spent so short a time in this country that she could hardly have allowed anyone to acquire so deep an influence over her that the mere sight of him would induce her to change her plans so completely. You see we have already arrived, by a process of exclusion, at the idea that she might have seen an American. Then who could this American be, and why should he possess so much influence over her? It might be a lover; it might be a husband. Her young womanhood had, I knew, been spent in rough scenes and under strange conditions. So far I had got before I ever heard Lord St. Simon's narrative. When he told us of a man in a pew, of the change in the bride's manner, of so transparent a device for obtaining a note as the dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to her confidential maid, and of her very significant allusion to claim-jumping--which in miners' parlance means taking possession of that which another person has a prior claim to--the whole situation became absolutely clear. She had gone off with a man, and the man was either a lover or was a previous husband--the chances being in favour of the latter."
"And how in the world did you find them?"
"It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held information in his hands the value of which he did not himself know. The initials were, of course, of the highest importance, but more valuable still was it to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of the most select London hotels."
"By the select prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence for a glass of sherry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels. There are not many in London which charge at that rate. In the second one which I visited in Northumberland Avenue, I learned by an inspection of the book that Francis H. Moulton, an American gentleman, had left only the day before, and on looking over the entries against him, I came upon the very items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. His letters were to be forwarded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither I travelled, and being fortunate enough to find the loving couple at home, I ventured to give them some paternal advice and to point out to them that it would be better in every way that they should make their position a little clearer both to the general public and to Lord St. Simon in particular. I invited them to meet him here, and, as you see, I made him keep the appointment."
"But with no very good result," I remarked. "His conduct was certainly not very gracious."
"Ah, Watson," said Holmes, smiling, "perhaps you would not be very gracious either, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wedding, you found yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of fortune. I think that we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our stars that we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position. Draw your chair up and hand me my violin, for the only problem we have still to solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings."
XI.  THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET
My friend rose lazily from his armchair and stood with his hands in the pockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder. It was a bright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day before still lay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun. Down the centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumbly band by the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges of the foot-paths it still lay as white as when it fell. The grey pavement had been cleaned and scraped, but was still dangerously slippery, so that there were fewer passengers than usual. Indeed, from the direction of the Metropolitan Station no one was coming save the single gentleman whose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.
"What on earth can be the matter with him?" I asked. "He is looking up at the numbers of the houses."
"Here?"
A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, still gesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief and despair in his eyes that our smiles were turned in an instant to horror and pity. For a while he could not get his words out, but swayed his body and plucked at his hair like one who has been driven to the extreme limits of his reason. Then, suddenly springing to his feet, he beat his head against the wall with such force that we both rushed upon him and tore him away to the centre of the room. Sherlock Holmes pushed him down into the easy-chair and, sitting beside him, patted his hand and chatted with him in the easy, soothing tones which he knew so well how to employ.
The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fighting against his emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his brow, set his lips tight, and turned his face towards us.
"No doubt you think me mad?" said he.
"God knows I have!--a trouble which is enough to unseat my reason, so sudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced, although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain. Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two coming together, and in so frightful a form, have been enough to shake my very soul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land may suffer unless some way be found out of this horrible affair."
"Pray compose yourself, sir," said Holmes, "and let me have a clear account of who you are and what it is that has befallen you."
"My name," answered our visitor, "is probably familiar to your ears. I am Alexander Holder, of the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, of Threadneedle Street."
The name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the senior partner in the second largest private banking concern in the City of London. What could have happened, then, to bring one of the foremost citizens of London to this most pitiable pass? We waited, all curiosity, until with another effort he braced himself to tell his story.
"I feel that time is of value," said he; "that is why I hastened here when the police inspector suggested that I should secure your co-operation. I came to Baker Street by the Underground and hurried from there on foot, for the cabs go slowly through this snow. That is why I was so out of breath, for I am a man who takes very little exercise. I feel better now, and I will put the facts before you as shortly and yet as clearly as I can.
"It is, of course, well known to you that in a successful banking business as much depends upon our being able to find remunerative investments for our funds as upon our increasing our connection and the number of our depositors. One of our most lucrative means of laying out money is in the shape of loans, where the security is unimpeachable. We have done a good deal in this direction during the last few years, and there are many noble families to whom we have advanced large sums upon the security of their pictures, libraries, or plate.
"Yesterday morning I was seated in my office at the bank when a card was brought in to me by one of the clerks. I started when I saw the name, for it was that of none other than--well, perhaps even to you I had better say no more than that it was a name which is a household word all over the earth--one of the highest, noblest, most exalted names in England. I was overwhelmed by the honour and attempted, when he entered, to say so, but he plunged at once into business with the air of a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a disagreeable task.
" 'Mr. Holder,' said he, 'I have been informed that you are in the habit of advancing money.'
" 'The firm does so when the security is good.' I answered.
" 'Precisely.' He opened the case, and there, imbedded in soft, flesh-coloured velvet, lay the magnificent piece of jewellery which he had named. 'There are thirty-nine enormous beryls,' said he, 'and the price of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimate would put the worth of the coronet at double the sum which I have asked. I am prepared to leave it with you as my security.'
" 'The propriety of my leaving it. You may set your mind at rest about that. I should not dream of doing so were it not absolutely certain that I should be able in four days to reclaim it. It is a pure matter of form. Is the security sufficient?'
" 'You understand, Mr. Holder, that I am giving you a strong proof of the confidence which I have in you, founded upon all that I have heard of you. I rely upon you not only to be discreet and to refrain from all gossip upon the matter but, above all, to preserve this coronet with every possible precaution because I need not say that a great public scandal would be caused if any harm were to befall it. Any injury to it would be almost as serious as its complete loss, for there are no beryls in the world to match these, and it would be impossible to replace them. I leave it with you, however, with every confidence, and I shall call for it in person on Monday morning.'
"Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I said no more but, calling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over fifty $1000 notes. When I was alone once more, however, with the precious case lying upon the table in front of me, I could not but think with some misgivings of the immense responsibility which it entailed upon me. There could be no doubt that, as it was a national possession, a horrible scandal would ensue if any misfortune should occur to it. I already regretted having ever consented to take charge of it. However, it was too late to alter the matter now, so I locked it up in my private safe and turned once more to my work.
"And now a word as to my household, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you to thoroughly understand the situation. My groom and my page sleep out of the house, and may be set aside altogether. I have three maid-servants who have been with me a number of years and whose absolute reliability is quite above suspicion. Another, Lucy Parr, the second waiting-maid, has only been in my service a few months. She came with an excellent character, however, and has always given me satisfaction. She is a very pretty girl and has attracted admirers who have occasionally hung about the place. That is the only drawback which we have found to her, but we believe her to be a thoroughly good girl in every way.
"It was naturally my intention that he should succeed me in my business, but he was not of a business turn. He was wild, wayward, and, to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the handling of large sums of money. When he was young he became a member of an aristocratic club, and there, having charming manners, he was soon the intimate of a number of men with long purses and expensive habits. He learned to play heavily at cards and to squander money on the turf, until he had again and again to come to me and implore me to give him an advance upon his allowance, that he might settle his debts of honour. He tried more than once to break away from the dangerous company which he was keeping, but each time the influence of his friend, Sir George Burnwell, was enough to draw him back again.
"Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live under my roof, and I shall continue with my miserable story.
" 'Where have you put it?' asked Arthur.
" 'Well, I hope to goodness the house won't be burgled during the night.' said he.
" 'Oh, any old key will fit that bureau. When I was a youngster I have opened it myself with the key of the box-room cupboard.'
" 'Look here, dad,' said he with his eyes cast down, 'can you let me have $200?'
" 'No, I cannot!' I answered sharply. 'I have been far too generous with you in money matters.'
" 'You have been very kind,' said he, 'but I must have this money, or else I can never show my face inside the club again.'
" 'And a very good thing, too!' I cried.
" 'Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonoured man,' said he. 'I could not bear the disgrace. I must raise the money in some way, and if you will not let me have it, then I must try other means.'
"I was very angry, for this was the third demand during the month. 'You shall not have a farthing from me,' I cried, on which he bowed and left the room without another word.
" 'Tell me, dad,' said she, looking, I thought, a little disturbed, 'did you give Lucy, the maid, leave to go out to-night?'
" 'She came in just now by the back door. I have no doubt that she has only been to the side gate to see someone, but I think that it is hardly safe and should be stopped.'
" 'You must speak to her in the morning, or I will if you prefer it. Are you sure that everything is fastened?'
" 'Then, good-night.' I kissed her and went up to my bedroom again, where I was soon asleep.
"I am endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may have any bearing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me upon any point which I do not make clear."
" 'Arthur!' I screamed, 'you villain! you thief! How dare you touch that coronet?'
"The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy, dressed only in his shirt and trousers, was standing beside the light, holding the coronet in his hands. He appeared to be wrenching at it, or bending it with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from his grasp and turned as pale as death. I snatched it up and examined it. One of the gold corners, with three of the beryls in it, was missing.
" 'You blackguard!' I shouted, beside myself with rage. 'You have destroyed it! You have dishonoured me forever! Where are the jewels which you have stolen?'
" 'Stolen!' he cried.
" 'Yes, thief!' I roared, shaking him by the shoulder.
" 'There are none missing. There cannot be any missing,' said he.
" 'There are three missing. And you know where they are. Must I call you a liar as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to tear off another piece?'
" 'You have called me names enough,' said he, 'I will not stand it any longer. I shall not say another word about this business, since you have chosen to insult me. I will leave your house in the morning and make my own way in the world.'
"By this time the whole house was astir, for I had raised my voice in my anger. Mary was the first to rush into my room, and, at the sight of the coronet and of Arthur's face, she read the whole story and, with a scream, fell down senseless on the ground. I sent the house-maid for the police and put the investigation into their hands at once. When the inspector and a constable entered the house, Arthur, who had stood sullenly with his arms folded, asked me whether it was my intention to charge him with theft. I answered that it had ceased to be a private matter, but had become a public one, since the ruined coronet was national property. I was determined that the law should have its way in everything.
" 'At least,' said he, 'you will not have me arrested at once. It would be to your advantage as well as mine if I might leave the house for five minutes.'
" 'That you may get away, or perhaps that you may conceal what you have stolen,' said I. And then, realising the dreadful position in which I was placed, I implored him to remember that not only my honour but that of one who was far greater than I was at stake; and that he threatened to raise a scandal which would convulse the nation. He might avert it all if he would but tell me what he had done with the three missing stones.
" 'You may as well face the matter,' said I; 'you have been caught in the act, and no confession could make your guilt more heinous. If you but make such reparation as is in your power, by telling us where the beryls are, all shall be forgiven and forgotten.'
" 'Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it,' he answered, turning away from me with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for any words of mine to influence him. There was but one way for it. I called in the inspector and gave him into custody. A search was made at once not only of his person but of his room and of every portion of the house where he could possibly have concealed the gems; but no trace of them could be found, nor would the wretched boy open his mouth for all our persuasions and our threats. This morning he was removed to a cell, and I, after going through all the police formalities, have hurried round to you to implore you to use your skill in unravelling the matter. The police have openly confessed that they can at present make nothing of it. You may go to any expense which you think necessary. I have already offered a reward of $1000. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honour, my gems, and my son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!"
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes, with his brows knitted and his eyes fixed upon the fire.
"Arthur does. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care for it."
"That is unusual in a young girl."
"She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is not so very young. She is four-and-twenty."
"How can we have when I saw him with my own eyes with the coronet in his hands."
"I hardly consider that a conclusive proof. Was the remainder of the coronet at all injured?"
"Yes, it was twisted."
"Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to straighten it?"
"God bless you! You are doing what you can for him and for me. But it is too heavy a task. What was he doing there at all? If his purpose were innocent, why did he not say so?"
"Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? His silence appears to me to cut both ways. There are several singular points about the case. What did the police think of the noise which awoke you from your sleep?"
"They considered that it might be caused by Arthur's closing his bedroom door."
"A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so as to wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance of these gems?"
"They are still sounding the planking and probing the furniture in the hope of finding them."
"Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. The whole garden has already been minutely examined."
"Now, my dear sir," said Holmes. "is it not obvious to you now that this matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or the police were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be a simple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what is involved by your theory. You suppose that your son came down from his bed, went, at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened your bureau, took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion of it, went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of the thirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and then returned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposed himself to the greatest danger of being discovered. I ask you now, is such a theory tenable?"
"But what other is there?" cried the banker with a gesture of despair. "If his motives were innocent, why does he not explain them?"
"It is our task to find that out," replied Holmes; "so now, if you please, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together, and devote an hour to glancing a little more closely into details."
My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition, which I was eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy were deeply stirred by the story to which we had listened. I confess that the guilt of the banker's son appeared to me to be as obvious as it did to his unhappy father, but still I had such faith in Holmes' judgment that I felt that there must be some grounds for hope as long as he was dissatisfied with the accepted explanation. He hardly spoke a word the whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with his chin upon his breast and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deepest thought. Our client appeared to have taken fresh heart at the little glimpse of hope which had been presented to him, and he even broke into a desultory chat with me over his business affairs. A short railway journey and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, the modest residence of the great financier.
Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone, standing back a little from the road. A double carriage-sweep, with a snow-clad lawn, stretched down in front to two large iron gates which closed the entrance. On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which led into a narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from the road to the kitchen door, and forming the tradesmen's entrance. On the left ran a lane which led to the stables, and was not itself within the grounds at all, being a public, though little used, thoroughfare. Holmes left us standing at the door and walked slowly all round the house, across the front, down the tradesmen's path, and so round by the garden behind into the stable lane. So long was he that Mr. Holder and I went into the dining-room and waited by the fire until he should return. We were sitting there in silence when the door opened and a young lady came in. She was rather above the middle height, slim, with dark hair and eyes, which seemed the darker against the absolute pallor of her skin. I do not think that I have ever seen such deadly paleness in a woman's face. Her lips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying. As she swept silently into the room she impressed me with a greater sense of grief than the banker had done in the morning, and it was the more striking in her as she was evidently a woman of strong character, with immense capacity for self-restraint. Disregarding my presence, she went straight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with a sweet womanly caress.
"You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated, have you not, dad?" she asked.
"No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the bottom."
"But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what woman's instincts are. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be sorry for having acted so harshly."
"Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent?"
"Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take my word for it that he is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more. It is so dreadful to think of our dear Arthur in prison!"
"I shall never let it drop until the gems are found--never, Mary! Your affection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to me. Far from hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman down from London to inquire more deeply into it."
"No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in the stable lane now."
"The stable lane?" She raised her dark eyebrows. "What can he hope to find there? Ah! this, I suppose, is he. I trust, sir, that you will succeed in proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousin Arthur is innocent of this crime."
"Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly. I heard that, and I came down."
"Yes."
"Were they all fastened this morning?"
"Yes."
"You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think that you remarked to your uncle last night that she had been out to see him?"
"Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing-room, and who may have heard uncle's remarks about the coronet."
"I see. You infer that she may have gone out to tell her sweetheart, and that the two may have planned the robbery."
"Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl, Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door, I presume?"
"Yes; when I went to see if the door was fastened for the night I met her slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom."
"Oh, yes! he is the green-grocer who brings our vegetables round. His name is Francis Prosper."
"He stood," said Holmes, "to the left of the door--that is to say, farther up the path than is necessary to reach the door?"
"And he is a man with a wooden leg?"
Something like fear sprang up in the young lady's expressive black eyes. "Why, you are like a magician," said she. "How do you know that?" She smiled, but there was no answering smile in Holmes' thin, eager face.
The banker's dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber, with a grey carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. Holmes went to the bureau first and looked hard at the lock.
"Which key was used to open it?" he asked.
"That is it on the dressing-table."
"Now, Mr. Holder," said Holmes, "here is the corner which corresponds to that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg that you will break it off."
"Then I will." Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but without result. "I feel it give a little," said he; "but, though I am exceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me all my time to break it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think would happen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise like a pistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within a few yards of your bed and that you heard nothing of it?"
"I do not know what to think. It is all dark to me."
"But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go. What do you think, Miss Holder?"
"I confess that I still share my uncle's perplexity."
"Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw him?"
"He had nothing on save only his trousers and shirt."
"Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with extraordinary luck during this inquiry, and it will be entirely our own fault if we do not succeed in clearing the matter up. With your permission, Mr. Holder, I shall now continue my investigations outside."
He went alone, at his own request, for he explained that any unnecessary footmarks might make his task more difficult. For an hour or more he was at work, returning at last with his feet heavy with snow and his features as inscrutable as ever.
"I think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder," said he; "I can serve you best by returning to my rooms."
"But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are they?"
"I cannot tell."
The banker wrung his hands. "I shall never see them again!" he cried. "And my son? You give me hopes?"
"Then, for God's sake, what was this dark business which was acted in my house last night?"
"I would give my fortune to have them back."
"Very good. I shall look into the matter between this and then. Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come over here again before evening."
"I think that this should do," said he, glancing into the glass above the fireplace. "I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, but I fear that it won't do. I may be on the trail in this matter, or I may be following a will-o'-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which it is. I hope that I may be back in a few hours." He cut a slice of beef from the joint upon the sideboard, sandwiched it between two rounds of bread, and thrusting this rude meal into his pocket he started off upon his expedition.
I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in excellent spirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand. He chucked it down into a corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.
"Where to?"
"How are you getting on?"
"Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streatham since I saw you last, but I did not call at the house. It is a very sweet little problem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal. However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get these disreputable clothes off and return to my highly respectable self."
I waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so I retired to my room. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away for days and nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that his lateness caused me no surprise. I do not know at what hour he came in, but when I came down to breakfast in the morning there he was with a cup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the other, as fresh and trim as possible.
"Why, it is after nine now," I answered. "I should not be surprised if that were he. I thought I heard a ring."
"I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried," said he. "Only two days ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a care in the world. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age. One sorrow comes close upon the heels of another. My niece, Mary, has deserted me."
"Deserted you?"
"Yes. Her bed this morning had not been slept in, her room was empty, and a note for me lay upon the hall table. I had said to her last night, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she had married my boy all might have been well with him. Perhaps it was thoughtless of me to say so. It is to that remark that she refers in this note:
" 'MY DEAREST UNCLE:--I feel that I have brought trouble upon you, and that if I had acted differently this terrible misfortune might never have occurred. I cannot, with this thought in my mind, ever again be happy under your roof, and I feel that I must leave you forever. Do not worry about my future, for that is provided for; and, above all, do not search for me, for it will be fruitless labour and an ill-service to me. In life or in death, I am ever your loving
"No, no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best possible solution. I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are nearing the end of your troubles."
"Ha! You say so! You have heard something, Mr. Holmes; you have learned something! Where are the gems?"
"That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. And there is a little reward, I fancy. Have you your check-book? Here is a pen. Better make it out for $4000."
With a dazed face the banker made out the required check. Holmes walked over to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of gold with three gems in it, and threw it down upon the table.
With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up.
The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and he hugged his recovered gems to his bosom.
"There is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder," said Sherlock Holmes rather sternly.
"No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to that noble lad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as I should be proud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have one."
"He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an interview with him, and finding that he would not tell me the story, I told it to him, on which he had to confess that I was right and to add the very few details which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news of this morning, however, may open his lips."
"For heaven's sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinary mystery!"
"I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it. And let me say to you, first, that which it is hardest for me to say and for you to hear: there has been an understanding between Sir George Burnwell and your niece Mary. They have now fled together."
"My Mary? Impossible!"
"It is unfortunately more than possible; it is certain. Neither you nor your son knew the true character of this man when you admitted him into your family circle. He is one of the most dangerous men in England--a ruined gambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a man without heart or conscience. Your niece knew nothing of such men. When he breathed his vows to her, as he had done to a hundred before her, she flattered herself that she alone had touched his heart. The devil knows best what he said, but at least she became his tool and was in the habit of seeing him nearly every evening."
"I cannot, and I will not, believe it!" cried the banker with an ashen face.
"Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his interview with you but he slept badly on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. In the middle of the night he heard a soft tread pass his door, so he rose and, looking out, was surprised to see his cousin walking very stealthily along the passage until she disappeared into your dressing-room. Petrified with astonishment, the lad slipped on some clothes and waited there in the dark to see what would come of this strange affair. Presently she emerged from the room again, and in the light of the passage-lamp your son saw that she carried the precious coronet in her hands. She passed down the stairs, and he, thrilling with horror, ran along and slipped behind the curtain near your door, whence he could see what passed in the hall beneath. He saw her stealthily open the window, hand out the coronet to someone in the gloom, and then closing it once more hurry back to her room, passing quite close to where he stood hid behind the curtain.
"Is it possible?" gasped the banker.
"And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet," cried Mr. Holder. "Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And his asking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fellow wanted to see if the missing piece were at the scene of the struggle. How cruelly I have misjudged him!"
"There was a double line of tracks of a booted man, and a second double line which I saw with delight belonged to a man with naked feet. I was at once convinced from what you had told me that the latter was your son. The first had walked both ways, but the other had run swiftly, and as his tread was marked in places over the depression of the boot, it was obvious that he had passed after the other. I followed them up and found they led to the hall window, where Boots had worn all the snow away while waiting. Then I walked to the other end, which was a hundred yards or more down the lane. I saw where Boots had faced round, where the snow was cut up as though there had been a struggle, and, finally, where a few drops of blood had fallen, to show me that I was not mistaken. Boots had then run down the lane, and another little smudge of blood showed that it was he who had been hurt. When he came to the highroad at the other end, I found that the pavement had been cleared, so there was an end to that clue.
"On entering the house, however, I examined, as you remember, the sill and framework of the hall window with my lens, and I could at once see that someone had passed out. I could distinguish the outline of an instep where the wet foot had been placed in coming in. I was then beginning to be able to form an opinion as to what had occurred. A man had waited outside the window; someone had brought the gems; the deed had been overseen by your son; he had pursued the thief; had struggled with him; they had each tugged at the coronet, their united strength causing injuries which neither alone could have effected. He had returned with the prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp of his opponent. So far I was clear. The question now was, who was the man and who was it brought him the coronet?
"And who could it be who was her confederate? A lover evidently, for who else could outweigh the love and gratitude which she must feel to you? I knew that you went out little, and that your circle of friends was a very limited one. But among them was Sir George Burnwell. I had heard of him before as being a man of evil reputation among women. It must have been he who wore those boots and retained the missing gems. Even though he knew that Arthur had discovered him, he might still flatter himself that he was safe, for the lad could not say a word without compromising his own family.
"Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures I took next. I went in the shape of a loafer to Sir George's house, managed to pick up an acquaintance with his valet, learned that his master had cut his head the night before, and, finally, at the expense of six shillings, made all sure by buying a pair of his cast-off shoes. With these I journeyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactly fitted the tracks."
XII.  THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES
"To the man who loves art for its own sake," remarked Sherlock Holmes, tossing aside the advertisement sheet of the Daily Telegraph, "it is frequently in its least important and lowliest manifestations that the keenest pleasure is to be derived. It is pleasant to me to observe, Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth that in these little records of our cases which you have been good enough to draw up, and, I am bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have given prominence not so much to the many causes celebres and sensational trials in which I have figured but rather to those incidents which may have been trivial in themselves, but which have given room for those faculties of deduction and of logical synthesis which I have made my special province."
"It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter," I remarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism which I had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my friend's singular character.
"No, it is not selfishness or conceit," said he, answering, as was his wont, my thoughts rather than my words. "If I claim full justice for my art, it is because it is an impersonal thing--a thing beyond myself. Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the logic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell. You have degraded what should have been a course of lectures into a series of tales."
It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after breakfast on either side of a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street. A thick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-coloured houses, and the opposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through the heavy yellow wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the white cloth and glimmer of china and metal, for the table had not been cleared yet. Sherlock Holmes had been silent all the morning, dipping continuously into the advertisement columns of a succession of papers until at last, having apparently given up his search, he had emerged in no very sweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.
"The end may have been so," I answered, "but the methods I hold to have been novel and of interest."
It was dated from Montague Place upon the preceding evening, and ran thus:
"VIOLET HUNTER."
"It is half-past ten now."
"It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You remember that the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere whim at first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be so in this case, also."
As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room. She was plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckled like a plover's egg, and with the brisk manner of a woman who has had her own way to make in the world.
"You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure," said she, as my companion rose to greet her, "but I have had a very strange experience, and as I have no parents or relations of any sort from whom I could ask advice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind enough to tell me what I should do."
"I have been a governess for five years," said she, "in the family of Colonel Spence Munro, but two months ago the colonel received an appointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and took his children over to America with him, so that I found myself without a situation. I advertised, and I answered advertisements, but without success. At last the little money which I had saved began to run short, and I was at my wit's end as to what I should do.
"There is a well-known agency for governesses in the West End called Westaway's, and there I used to call about once a week in order to see whether anything had turned up which might suit me. Westaway was the name of the founder of the business, but it is really managed by Miss Stoper. She sits in her own little office, and the ladies who are seeking employment wait in an anteroom, and are then shown in one by one, when she consults her ledgers and sees whether she has anything which would suit them.
" 'That will do,' said he; 'I could not ask for anything better. Capital! capital!' He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his hands together in the most genial fashion. He was such a comfortable-looking man that it was quite a pleasure to look at him.
" 'You are looking for a situation, miss?' he asked.
" 'Yes, sir.'
" 'Oh, tut, tut! sweating--rank sweating!' he cried, throwing his fat hands out into the air like a man who is in a boiling passion. 'How could anyone offer so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attractions and accomplishments?'
"You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such an offer seemed almost too good to be true. The gentleman, however, seeing perhaps the look of incredulity upon my face, opened a pocket-book and took out a note.
" 'Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Copper Beeches, five miles on the far side of Winchester. It is the most lovely country, my dear young lady, and the dearest old country-house.'
" 'And my duties, sir? I should be glad to know what they would be.'
" 'My sole duties, then,' I asked, 'are to take charge of a single child?'
" 'No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young lady,' he cried. 'Your duty would be, as I am sure your good sense would suggest, to obey any little commands my wife might give, provided always that they were such commands as a lady might with propriety obey. You see no difficulty, heh?'
" 'I should be happy to make myself useful.'
" 'Or to sit here, or sit there, that would not be offensive to you?'
" 'Or to cut your hair quite short before you come to us?'
" 'I am afraid that that is quite impossible,' said I. He had been watching me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadow pass over his face as I spoke.
" 'I am afraid that it is quite essential,' said he. 'It is a little fancy of my wife's, and ladies' fancies, you know, madam, ladies' fancies must be consulted. And so you won't cut your hair?'
" 'No, sir, I really could not,' I answered firmly.
" 'Ah, very well; then that quite settles the matter. It is a pity, because in other respects you would really have done very nicely. In that case, Miss Stoper, I had best inspect a few more of your young ladies.'
" 'If you please, Miss Stoper.'
" 'Well, really, it seems rather useless, since you refuse the most excellent offers in this fashion,' said she sharply. 'You can hardly expect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you. Good-day to you, Miss Hunter.' She struck a gong upon the table, and I was shown out by the page.
" 'DEAR MISS HUNTER:--Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your address, and I write from here to ask you whether you have reconsidered your decision. My wife is very anxious that you should come, for she has been much attracted by my description of you. We are willing to give $30 a quarter, or $120 a year, so as to recompense you for any little inconvenience which our fads may cause you. They are not very exacting, after all. My wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would like you to wear such a dress indoors in the morning. You need not, however, go to the expense of purchasing one, as we have one belonging to my dear daughter Alice (now in Philadelphia), which would, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as to sitting here or there, or amusing yourself in any manner indicated, that need cause you no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it is no doubt a pity, especially as I could not help remarking its beauty during our short interview, but I am afraid that I must remain firm upon this point, and I only hope that the increased salary may recompense you for the loss. Your duties, as far as the child is concerned, are very light. Now do try to come, and I shall meet you with the dog-cart at Winchester. Let me know your train. Yours faithfully,
" 'JEPHRO RUCASTLE.'
"That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my mind is made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, that before taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter to your consideration."
"Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles the question," said Holmes, smiling.
"I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understand afterwards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if I felt that you were at the back of me."
"Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that your little problem promises to be the most interesting which has come my way for some months. There is something distinctly novel about some of the features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger--"
Holmes shook his head gravely. "It would cease to be a danger if we could define it," said he. "But at any time, day or night, a telegram would bring me down to your help."
"At least," said I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending the stairs, "she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to take care of herself."
"And she would need to be," said Holmes gravely. "I am much mistaken if we do not hear from her before many days are past."
It was not very long before my friend's prediction was fulfilled. A fortnight went by, during which I frequently found my thoughts turning in her direction and wondering what strange side-alley of human experience this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusual salary, the curious conditions, the light duties, all pointed to something abnormal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether the man were a philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond my powers to determine. As to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently for half an hour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but he swept the matter away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it. "Data! data! data!" he cried impatiently. "I can't make bricks without clay." And yet he would always wind up by muttering that no sister of his should ever have accepted such a situation.
"Just look up the trains in Bradshaw," said he, and turned back to his chemical studies.
The summons was a brief and urgent one.
"Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winchester at midday to-morrow," it said. "Do come! I am at my wit's end.
"HUNTER."
"Will you come with me?" asked Holmes, glancing up.
"I should wish to."
"Are they not fresh and beautiful?" I cried with all the enthusiasm of a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.
But Holmes shook his head gravely.
"Do you know, Watson," said he, "that it is one of the curses of a mind with a turn like mine that I must look at everything with reference to my own special subject. You look at these scattered houses, and you are impressed by their beauty. I look at them, and the only thought which comes to me is a feeling of their isolation and of the impunity with which crime may be committed there."
"They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson, founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in London do not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the smiling and beautiful countryside."
"You horrify me!"
"But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of public opinion can do in the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no lane so vile that the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard's blow, does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours, and then the whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word of complaint can set it going, and there is but a step between the crime and the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own fields, filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know little of the law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden wickedness which may go on, year in, year out, in such places, and none the wiser. Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to live in Winchester, I should never have had a fear for her. It is the five miles of country which makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she is not personally threatened."
"No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get away."
"What can be the matter, then? Can you suggest no explanation?"
"I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would cover the facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correct can only be determined by the fresh information which we shall no doubt find waiting for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral, and we shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell."
The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no distance from the station, and there we found the young lady waiting for us. She had engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awaited us upon the table.
"Pray tell us what has happened to you."
"Let us have everything in its due order." Holmes thrust his long thin legs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.
"What can you not understand?"
"Their reasons for their conduct. But you shall have it all just as it occurred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here and drove me in his dog-cart to the Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifully situated, but it is not beautiful in itself, for it is a large square block of a house, whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with damp and bad weather. There are grounds round it, woods on three sides, and on the fourth a field which slopes down to the Southampton highroad, which curves past about a hundred yards from the front door. This ground in front belongs to the house, but the woods all round are part of Lord Southerton's preserves. A clump of copper beeches immediately in front of the hall door has given its name to the place.
"Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as in feature. She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse. She was a nonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted both to her husband and to her little son. Her light grey eyes wandered continually from one to the other, noting every little want and forestalling it if possible. He was kind to her also in his bluff, boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy couple. And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She would often be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face. More than once I have surprised her in tears. I have thought sometimes that it was the disposition of her child which weighed upon her mind, for I have never met so utterly spoiled and so ill-natured a little creature. He is small for his age, with a head which is quite disproportionately large. His whole life appears to be spent in an alternation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals of sulking. Giving pain to any creature weaker than himself seems to be his one idea of amusement, and he shows quite remarkable talent in planning the capture of mice, little birds, and insects. But I would rather not talk about the creature, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has little to do with my story."
"I am glad of all details," remarked my friend, "whether they seem to you to be relevant or not."
"I shall try not to miss anything of importance. The one unpleasant thing about the house, which struck me at once, was the appearance and conduct of the servants. There are only two, a man and his wife. Toller, for that is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzled hair and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink. Twice since I have been with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemed to take no notice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong woman with a sour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle and much less amiable. They are a most unpleasant couple, but fortunately I spend most of my time in the nursery and my own room, which are next to each other in one corner of the building.
"For two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was very quiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast and whispered something to her husband.
" 'Oh, yes,' said he, turning to me, 'we are very much obliged to you, Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as to cut your hair. I assure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota from your appearance. We shall now see how the electric-blue dress will become you. You will find it laid out upon the bed in your room, and if you would be so good as to put it on we should both be extremely obliged.'
"You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curious I became as to what the meaning of this extraordinary performance could possibly be. They were always very careful, I observed, to turn my face away from the window, so that I became consumed with the desire to see what was going on behind my back. At first it seemed to be impossible, but I soon devised a means. My hand-mirror had been broken, so a happy thought seized me, and I concealed a piece of the glass in my handkerchief. On the next occasion, in the midst of my laughter, I put my handkerchief up to my eyes, and was able with a little management to see all that there was behind me. I confess that I was disappointed. There was nothing. At least that was my first impression. At the second glance, however, I perceived that there was a man standing in the Southampton Road, a small bearded man in a grey suit, who seemed to be looking in my direction. The road is an important highway, and there are usually people there. This man, however, was leaning against the railings which bordered our field and was looking earnestly up. I lowered my handkerchief and glanced at Mrs. Rucastle to find her eyes fixed upon me with a most searching gaze. She said nothing, but I am convinced that she had divined that I had a mirror in my hand and had seen what was behind me. She rose at once.
" 'Jephro,' said she, 'there is an impertinent fellow upon the road there who stares up at Miss Hunter.'
" 'No, I know no one in these parts.'
"I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down the blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat again in the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man in the road."
"Pray continue," said Holmes. "Your narrative promises to be a most interesting one."
"You will find it rather disconnected, I fear, and there may prove to be little relation between the different incidents of which I speak. On the very first day that I was at the Copper Beeches, Mr. Rucastle took me to a small outhouse which stands near the kitchen door. As we approached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and the sound as of a large animal moving about.
" 'Look in here!' said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit between two planks. 'Is he not a beauty?'
" 'Don't be frightened,' said my employer, laughing at the start which I had given. 'It's only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but really old Toller, my groom, is the only man who can do anything with him. We feed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he is always as keen as mustard. Toller lets him loose every night, and God help the trespasser whom he lays his fangs upon. For goodness' sake don't you ever on any pretext set your foot over the threshold at night, for it's as much as your life is worth.'
"The warning was no idle one, for two nights later I happened to look out of my bedroom window about two o'clock in the morning. It was a beautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the house was silvered over and almost as bright as day. I was standing, rapt in the peaceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that something was moving under the shadow of the copper beeches. As it emerged into the moonshine I saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf, tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge projecting bones. It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadow upon the other side. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill to my heart which I do not think that any burglar could have done.
"This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in the grounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I could see the windows of this part of the house. There were four of them in a row, three of which were simply dirty, while the fourth was shuttered up. They were evidently all deserted. As I strolled up and down, glancing at them occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out to me, looking as merry and jovial as ever.
" 'Ah!' said he, 'you must not think me rude if I passed you without a word, my dear young lady. I was preoccupied with business matters.'
"I assured him that I was not offended. 'By the way,' said I, 'you seem to have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and one of them has the shutters up.'
"He looked surprised and, as it seemed to me, a little startled at my remark.
" 'Photography is one of my hobbies,' said he. 'I have made my dark room up there. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we have come upon. Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believed it?' He spoke in a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his eyes as he looked at me. I read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, from the moment that I understood that there was something about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I was all on fire to go over them. It was not mere curiosity, though I have my share of that. It was more a feeling of duty--a feeling that some good might come from my penetrating to this place. They talk of woman's instinct; perhaps it was woman's instinct which gave me that feeling. At any rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the lookout for any chance to pass the forbidden door.
"There was a little passage in front of me, unpapered and uncarpeted, which turned at a right angle at the farther end. Round this corner were three doors in a line, the first and third of which were open. They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheerless, with two windows in the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that the evening light glimmered dimly through them. The centre door was closed, and across the outside of it had been fastened one of the broad bars of an iron bed, padlocked at one end to a ring in the wall, and fastened at the other with stout cord. The door itself was locked as well, and the key was not there. This barricaded door corresponded clearly with the shuttered window outside, and yet I could see by the glimmer from beneath it that the room was not in darkness. Evidently there was a skylight which let in light from above. As I stood in the passage gazing at the sinister door and wondering what secret it might veil, I suddenly heard the sound of steps within the room and saw a shadow pass backward and forward against the little slit of dim light which shone out from under the door. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at the sight, Mr. Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly, and I turned and ran--ran as though some dreadful hand were behind me clutching at the skirt of my dress. I rushed down the passage, through the door, and straight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waiting outside.
" 'So,' said he, smiling, 'it was you, then. I thought that it must be when I saw the door open.'
" 'Oh, I am so frightened!' I panted.
" 'My dear young lady! my dear young lady!'--you cannot think how caressing and soothing his manner was--'and what has frightened you, my dear young lady?'
" 'I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,' I answered. 'But it is so lonely and eerie in this dim light that I was frightened and ran out again. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in there!'
" 'Only that?' said he, looking at me keenly.
" 'Why do you think that I lock this door?'
" 'I am sure that I do not know.'
" 'I am sure if I had known--'
" 'Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your foot over that threshold again'--here in an instant the smile hardened into a grin of rage, and he glared down at me with the face of a demon--'I'll throw you to the mastiff.'
"I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that I must have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until I found myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of you, Mr. Holmes. I could not live there longer without some advice. I was frightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the servants, even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I could only bring you down all would be well. Of course I might have fled from the house, but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My mind was soon made up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went down to the office, which is about half a mile from the house, and then returned, feeling very much easier. A horrible doubt came into my mind as I approached the door lest the dog might be loose, but I remembered that Toller had drunk himself into a state of insensibility that evening, and I knew that he was the only one in the household who had any influence with the savage creature, or who would venture to set him free. I slipped in in safety and lay awake half the night in my joy at the thought of seeing you. I had no difficulty in getting leave to come into Winchester this morning, but I must be back before three o'clock, for Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle are going on a visit, and will be away all the evening, so that I must look after the child. Now I have told you all my adventures, Mr. Holmes, and I should be very glad if you could tell me what it all means, and, above all, what I should do."
Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story. My friend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in his pockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon his face.
"Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothing with him."
"That is well. And the Rucastles go out to-night?"
"Yes."
"Yes, the wine-cellar."
"I will try. What is it?"
"I will do it."
"Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of course there is only one feasible explanation. You have been brought there to personate someone, and the real person is imprisoned in this chamber. That is obvious. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt that it is the daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right, who was said to have gone to America. You were chosen, doubtless, as resembling her in height, figure, and the colour of your hair. Hers had been cut off, very possibly in some illness through which she has passed, and so, of course, yours had to be sacrificed also. By a curious chance you came upon her tresses. The man in the road was undoubtedly some friend of hers--possibly her fiance--and no doubt, as you wore the girl's dress and were so like her, he was convinced from your laughter, whenever he saw you, and afterwards from your gesture, that Miss Rucastle was perfectly happy, and that she no longer desired his attentions. The dog is let loose at night to prevent him from endeavouring to communicate with her. So much is fairly clear. The most serious point in the case is the disposition of the child."
"What on earth has that to do with it?" I ejaculated.
"We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man. We can do nothing until seven o'clock. At that hour we shall be with you, and it will not be long before we solve the mystery."
"Have you managed it?" asked Holmes.
A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. "That is Mrs. Toller in the cellar," said she. "Her husband lies snoring on the kitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of Mr. Rucastle's."
"You have done well indeed!" cried Holmes with enthusiasm. "Now lead the way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business."
We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down a passage, and found ourselves in front of the barricade which Miss Hunter had described. Holmes cut the cord and removed the transverse bar. Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but without success. No sound came from within, and at the silence Holmes' face clouded over.
"I trust that we are not too late," said he. "I think, Miss Hunter, that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder to it, and we shall see whether we cannot make our way in."
"There has been some villainy here," said Holmes; "this beauty has guessed Miss Hunter's intentions and has carried his victim off."
"But it is impossible," said Miss Hunter; "the ladder was not there when the Rucastles went away."
The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at the door of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in his hand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sight of him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and confronted him.
The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open skylight.
"He's gone for the dog!" cried Miss Hunter.
"I have my revolver," said I.
"Better close the front door," cried Holmes, and we all rushed down the stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard the baying of a hound, and then a scream of agony, with a horrible worrying sound which it was dreadful to listen to. An elderly man with a red face and shaking limbs came staggering out at a side door.
Holmes and I rushed out and round the angle of the house, with Toller hurrying behind us. There was the huge famished brute, its black muzzle buried in Rucastle's throat, while he writhed and screamed upon the ground. Running up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over with its keen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of his neck. With much labour we separated them and carried him, living but horribly mangled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawing-room sofa, and having dispatched the sobered Toller to bear the news to his wife, I did what I could to relieve his pain. We were all assembled round him when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt woman entered the room.
"Mrs. Toller!" cried Miss Hunter.
"Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went up to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn't let me know what you were planning, for I would have told you that your pains were wasted."
"Ha!" said Holmes, looking keenly at her. "It is clear that Mrs. Toller knows more about this matter than anyone else."
"Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know."
"She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn't, from the time that her father married again. She was slighted like and had no say in anything, but it never really became bad for her until after she met Mr. Fowler at a friend's house. As well as I could learn, Miss Alice had rights of her own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she was, that she never said a word about them but just left everything in Mr. Rucastle's hands. He knew he was safe with her; but when there was a chance of a husband coming forward, who would ask for all that the law would give him, then her father thought it time to put a stop on it. He wanted her to sign a paper, so that whether she married or not, he could use her money. When she wouldn't do it, he kept on worrying her until she got brain-fever, and for six weeks was at death's door. Then she got better at last, all worn to a shadow, and with her beautiful hair cut off; but that didn't make no change in her young man, and he stuck to her as true as man could be."
"Yes, sir."
"That was it, sir."
"But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be, blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by certain arguments, metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that your interests were the same as his."
"Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman," said Mrs. Toller serenely.
"And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want of drink, and that a ladder should be ready at the moment when your master had gone out."
"You have it, sir, just as it happened."
"I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller," said Holmes, "for you have certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comes the country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we had best escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me that our locus standi now is rather a questionable one."
And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the copper beeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was always a broken man, kept alive solely through the care of his devoted wife. They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much of Rucastle's past life that he finds it difficult to part from them. Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, in Southampton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of a government appointment in the island of Mauritius. As to Miss Violet Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested no further interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of one of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at Walsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***
This file should be named advsh12h.htm or advsh12h.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, advsh13h.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, advsh12ah.txt
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
and editing by those who wish to do so.
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03
Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)
We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.
Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):
eBooks Year Month
    1  1971 July
 1000  1997 August
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.
We need your donations more than ever!
As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.
We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
ways.
Donations by check or money order may be sent to:
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.
We need your donations more than ever!
You can get up to date donation information online at:
***
If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.
**The Legal Small Print**
(Three Pages)
***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.
*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:
[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     *EITHER*:
     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR
     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.
The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the United States
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net
Author: Charles A. Beard and Mary R. Beard
Language: English
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES ***
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
HISTORY
OF THE
UNITED STATES
BY
AND
New York
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
1921
_All rights reserved_
COPYRIGHT, 1921,
BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
Set up and electrotyped. Published March, 1921.
J.S. Cushing Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
is usually a very condensed narrative with emphasis on biographies and
addition of forty or fifty thousand words. Finally, there is the high
school manual. This, too, ordinarily follows the beaten path, giving
do not assume that our children obtain permanent possessions from their
is that teachers have learned from bitter experience how little history
methods of historical instruction. If the study of history cannot be
made truly progressive like the study of mathematics, science, and
languages, then the historians assume a grave responsibility in adding
their subject to the already overloaded curriculum. If the successive
criticism which it is receiving from teachers of science, civics, and
In this condition of affairs we find our justification for offering a
new high school text in American history. Our first contribution is one
biographies of heroes are left out. We frankly hold that, if pupils know
little or nothing about Columbus, Cortes, Magellan, or Captain John
Smith by the time they reach the high school, it is useless to tell the
In the next place we have omitted all descriptions of battles. Our
battle is a highly technical, and usually a highly controversial, matter
operations most writers and teachers of history are mere novices. To
dispose of Gettysburg or the Wilderness in ten lines or ten pages is
equally absurd to the serious student of military affairs. Any one who
compares the ordinary textbook account of a single Civil War campaign
with the account given by Ropes, for instance, will ask for no further
comment. No youth called upon to serve our country in arms would think
interest of the immature pupil, seems out of place in a book that
deliberately appeals to boys and girls on the very threshold of life's
_First._ We have written a topical, not a narrative, history. We have
tried to set forth the important aspects, problems, and movements of
_Second._ We have emphasized those historical topics which help to
explain how our nation has come to be what it is to-day.
_Third._ We have dwelt fully upon the social and economic aspects of our
history, especially in relation to the politics of each period.
of financing and sustaining armed forces, rather than military strategy.
understand, if they are to play well their part in war and peace.
_Fifth._ By omitting the period of exploration, we have been able to
to the history of those current questions which must form the subject
_Sixth._ We have borne in mind that America, with all her unique
reciprocal influences of nations their appropriate place.
study of a mere narrative calls mainly for the use of the memory. We
reflection, and generalization--habits calculated to enlarge as well as
inform the mind. We have been at great pains to make our text clear,
simple, and direct; but we have earnestly sought to stretch the
intellects of our readers--to put them upon their mettle. Most of them
will receive the last of their formal instruction in the high school.
The world will soon expect maturity from them. Their achievements will
effectiveness of their citizenship in our republic will be measured by
information.
     NEW YORK CITY,
=A SMALL LIBRARY IN AMERICAN HISTORY=
_=SINGLE VOLUMES:=_
BASSETT, J.S. _A Short History of the United States_
_=SERIES:=_
WILSON, WOODROW. _Division and Reunion_
BECKER, C.L. _Beginnings of the American People_
DODD, W.E. _Expansion and Conflict_
JOHNSON, A. _Union and Democracy_
PAXSON, F.L. _The New Nation_
PART I. THE COLONIAL PERIOD
CHAPTER                                                           PAGE
          The Colonial Peoples                                       6
          The Process of Colonization                               12
          The Land and the Westward Movement                        20
  III.  SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PROGRESS                               38
          Schools and Colleges                                      43
          The Colonial Press                                        46
          Relations with the Indians and the French                 57
          The Effects of Warfare on the Colonies                    61
          Summary of Colonial Period                                73
PART II. CONFLICT AND INDEPENDENCE
    V.  THE NEW COURSE IN BRITISH IMPERIAL POLICY                   77
          George III and His System                                 77
          George III's Ministers and Their Colonial Policies        79
          Resumption of British Revenue and Commercial Policies     87
          Renewed Resistance in America                             90
          From Reform to Revolution in America                      95
   VI.  THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION                                     99
          Resistance and Retaliation                                99
          The Establishment of Government and the New Allegiance   108
          Military Affairs                                         116
          The Finances of the Revolution                           125
          Peace at Last                                            132
          Summary of the Revolutionary Period                      135
  VII.  THE FORMATION OF THE CONSTITUTION                          139
          The Promise and the Difficulties of America              139
          The Calling of a Constitutional Convention               143
          The Framing of the Constitution                          146
          The Struggle over Ratification                           157
          The Men and Measures of the New Government               162
          Foreign Influences and Domestic Politics                 171
   IX.  THE JEFFERSONIAN REPUBLICANS IN POWER                      186
          Republican Principles and Policies                       186
          The Republican War for Commercial Independence           193
          Summary of Union and National Politics                   212
PART IV. THE WEST AND JACKSONIAN DEMOCRACY
          The Western Migration and New States                     221
   XI.  JACKSONIAN DEMOCRACY                                       238
          The Democratic Movement in the East                      238
          The New Democracy Enters the Arena                       244
          The New Democracy at Washington                          250
          The Rise of the Whigs                                    260
          The Interaction of American and European Opinion         265
          The Advance of the Middle Border                         271
PART V. SECTIONAL CONFLICT AND RECONSTRUCTION
          The Industrial Revolution                                296
          Slavery--North and South                                 316
          Slavery in National Politics                             324
   XV.  THE CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION                           344
          The Southern Confederacy                                 344
          The Results of the Civil War                             365
PART VI. NATIONAL GROWTH AND WORLD POLITICS
          The Economic Advance of the South                        389
XVIII.  THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GREAT WEST                          425
          The Evolution of Grazing and Agriculture                 431
          Mining and Manufacturing in the West                     436
          The Admission of New States                              440
  XIX.  DOMESTIC ISSUES BEFORE THE COUNTRY (1865-1897)             451
          The Currency Question                                    452
          The Protective Tariff and Taxation                       459
          The Railways and Trusts                                  460
          Republican Measures and Results                          472
   XX.  AMERICA A WORLD POWER (1865-1900)                          477
          American Foreign Relations (1865-1898)                   478
          Summary of National Growth and World Politics            504
          Foreign Affairs                                          508
          The Roosevelt Domestic Policies                          519
          The Administration of President Taft                     527
          Progressive Insurgency and the Election of 1912          530
          An Age of Criticism                                      536
          Political Reforms                                        538
          Measures of Economic Reform                              546
          The Rise of the Woman Movement                           555
          The National Struggle for Woman Suffrage                 562
          Cooperation between Employers and Employees              571
          The Rise and Growth of Organized Labor                   575
  XXV.  PRESIDENT WILSON AND THE WORLD WAR                         588
          Domestic Legislation                                     588
          The United States and the European War                   596
          The United States at War                                 604
          The Settlement at Paris                                  612
          Summary of Democracy and the World War                   620
APPENDIX                                                           627
A TOPICAL SYLLABUS                                                 645
                                                                   PAGE
German and Scotch-Irish Settlements                                  8
The Colonies at the Time of the Declaration of Independence
      (color map)                                     _Facing_     108
      (color map)                                     _Facing_     134
The United States in 1805 (color map)                 _Facing_     193
Roads and Trails into Western Territory (color map)   _Facing_     224
Distribution of Population in 1830                                 235
The Oregon Country and the Disputed Boundary                       285
The Overland Trails                                                287
Distribution of Slaves in Southern States                          323
Slave and Free Soil on the Eve of the Civil War                    335
The United States in 1861 (color map)                 _Facing_     345
Railroads of the United States in 1918                             405
The United States in 1870 (color map)                _Facing_      427
The United States in 1912 (color map)                _Facing_      443
Europe in 1919 (color map)                         _Between_   618-619
     "THE NATIONS OF THE WEST" (popularly called "The
     San Francisco in 1915. Facing the Court of the Universe
     made our civilization. From left to right appear the
     German, the Italian, the Anglo-American, and the American
     of the prairie schooner, is a figure, beautiful and almost
     girlish, but strong, dignified, and womanly, the Mother of
     To-morrow. Above the group rides the Spirit of Enterprise,
     person of two boys. The group as a whole is beautifully
"THE NATIONS OF THE WEST"]
HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES
PART I. THE COLONIAL PERIOD
CHAPTER I
during the early years of the seventeenth century was but one phase in
westward as far as Gaul, across the Mediterranean, and eastward into
Asia Minor, perhaps to the very confines of India. The Romans, supported
narrow lands of Italy until it stretched from the heather of Scotland to
the settlement of America was merely a part. And it was, moreover, only
one aspect of the expansion which finally carried the peoples, the
institutions, and the trade of Europe to the very ends of the earth.
In one vital point, it must be noted, American colonization differed
altar of the parent city; but thousands of the immigrants who came to
America disliked the state and disowned the church of the mother
up altars of their own. They sought not only new soil to till but also
political and religious liberty for themselves and their children.
water and found homes in the American wilderness at the opening of the
seventeenth century. Ships, tools, and supplies called for huge outlays
of money. Stores had to be furnished in quantities sufficient to sustain
the life of the settlers until they could gather harvests of their own.
the hazards of the new world. Soldiers were required for defense and
mariners for the exploration of inland waters. Leaders of good judgment,
adept in managing men, had to be discovered. Altogether such an
gentleman could amass and involved risks more imminent than he dared to
proprietors were able to establish colonies on their own account, it was
the corporation that furnished the capital and leadership in the
instrument for colonization in companies of merchant adventurers, which
Such a corporation was composed of many persons of different ranks of
particular undertaking, each contributing a sum of money and sharing in
the profits of the venture. It was organized under royal authority; it
received its charter, its grant of land, and its trading privileges from
control. The charter named all the persons originally included in the
affairs, including the right to admit new members. The company was in
fact a little government set up by the king. When the members of the
corporation remained in England, as in the case of the Virginia Company,
they operated through agents sent to the colony. When they came over the
seas themselves and settled in America, as in the case of Massachusetts,
they became the direct government of the country they possessed. The
stockholders in that instance became the voters and the governor, the
chief magistrate.
[Illustration: JOHN WINTHROP, GOVERNOR OF THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY
trading corporation. It was the London Company, created by King James I,
in 1606, that laid during the following year the foundations of Virginia
at Jamestown. It was under the auspices of their West India Company,
in 1629 under the title: "The governor and company of the Massachusetts
drawn together by religious ties. "We must be knit together as one man,"
wrote John Winthrop, the first Puritan governor in America. Far to the
in 1638 made the beginnings of a settlement, christened New Sweden; it
was destined to pass under the rule of the Dutch, and finally under the
In a certain sense, Georgia may be included among the "company
for debt. To realize this humane purpose, he secured from King George
himself, into "one body politic and corporate," known as the "Trustees
for establishing the colony of Georgia in America." In the structure of
their organization and their methods of government, the trustees did not
differ materially from the regular companies created for trade and
colonization. Though their purposes were benevolent, their transactions
the settlement of America was the religious brotherhood, or
congregation, of men and women brought together in the bonds of a common
religious faith. By one of the strange fortunes of history, this
potent force in the origin and growth of self-government in a land far
away from Galilee. "And the multitude of them that believed were of one
Jerusalem. "We are knit together as a body in a most sacred covenant of
leader among the Pilgrims who founded their tiny colony of Plymouth in
1620. The Mayflower Compact, so famous in American history, was but a
written and signed agreement, incorporating the spirit of obedience to
Three other colonies, all of which retained their identity until the eve
congregations of the faithful: Rhode Island, Connecticut, and New
small bodies of men and women, "united in solemn covenants with the
Lord," who planted their settlements in the wilderness. Not until many a
to the Narragansett country was Rhode Island granted a charter of
of Thomas Hooker from Newtown blazed the way into the Connecticut River
(1662) and a place among the colonies. Half a century elapsed before the
towns laid out beyond the Merrimac River by emigrants from Massachusetts
were formed into the royal province of New Hampshire in 1679.
Even when Connecticut was chartered, the parchment and sealing wax of
towns of Hartford, Windsor, and Wethersfield had long lived happily
Articles" drafted in the same year. The pioneers on the Connecticut
=The Proprietor.=--A third and very important colonial agency was the
proprietor, or proprietary. As the name, associated with the word
granted property in lands in North America to have, hold, use, and enjoy
for his own benefit and profit, with the right to hand the estate down
powerful person, prepared to furnish or secure the capital, collect the
and sustain a plantation beyond the seas. Sometimes the proprietor
worked alone. Sometimes two or more were associated like partners in the
Five colonies, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and the Carolinas,
in most cases their prosperity, to the proprietary system. Maryland,
established in 1634 under a Catholic nobleman, Lord Baltimore, and
and Carteret, in 1664, passed under the direct government of the crown
in 1702. Pennsylvania was, in a very large measure, the product of the
generous spirit and tireless labors of its first proprietor, the leader
of the Friends, William Penn, to whom it was granted in 1681 and in
whose family it remained until 1776. The two Carolinas were first
organized as one colony in 1663 under the government and patronage of
eight proprietors, including Lord Clarendon; but after more than half a
THE COLONIAL PEOPLES
New York and Delaware, were English. During the early days of all, save
women, and children of "all sorts and conditions." The major portion
were yeomen, or small land owners, farm laborers, and artisans. With
them were merchants and gentlemen who brought their stocks of goods or
their fortunes to the New World. Scholars came from Oxford and
Cambridge to preach the gospel or to teach. Now and then the son of an
Established Church of England; Puritans who had labored to reform that
church; Separatists, Baptists, and Friends, who had left it altogether;
and Catholics, who clung to the religion of their fathers.
New England was almost purely English. During the years between 1629 and
Virginia, too, for a long time drew nearly all her immigrants from
England alone. Not until the eve of the Revolution did other
nationalities, mainly the Scotch-Irish and Germans, rival the English in
numbers.
Pennsylvania, and Georgia--while receiving a steady stream of
the older settlements. New York was invaded by Puritans from New England
in such numbers as to cause the Anglican clergymen there to lament that
"free thinking spreads almost as fast as the Church." North Carolina was
first settled toward the northern border by immigrants from Virginia.
Some of the North Carolinians, particularly the Quakers, came all the
little they were wanted in that Anglican colony.
the Scotch-Irish, Presbyterians in belief, English in tongue. Both
ancestors, in the days of Cromwell, had settled in the north of Ireland
whence the native Irish had been driven by the conqueror's sword. There
the Scotch nourished for many years enjoying in peace their own form of
religion and growing prosperous in the manufacture of fine linen and
woolen cloth. Then the blow fell. Toward the end of the seventeenth
twenty thousand Scotch-Irish left Ulster alone, for America; and all
during the eighteenth century the migration continued to be heavy.
Although no exact record was kept, it is reckoned that the Scotch-Irish
and the Scotch who came directly from Scotland, composed one-sixth of
the entire American population on the eve of the Revolution.
IMMIGRANTS]
These newcomers in America made their homes chiefly in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. Coming late upon
laid out their small farms, and worked as "sturdy yeomen on the soil,"
hardy, industrious, and independent in spirit, sharing neither the
merchants. To their agriculture they added woolen and linen
women, made heavy inroads upon the trade of the English merchants in
    Strong natures tuned to the harvest-song and bound to the kindly soil;
colonial records. A number of the artisans and carpenters in the first
Jamestown colony were of German descent. Peter Minuit, the famous
Jacob Leisler, leader of a popular uprising against the provincial
lands and he made a special effort to attract peasants from the Rhine
more than twenty thousand acres from him and in 1684 established a
distribution. All the way from Maine to Georgia inducements were offered
to the German farmers and in nearly every colony were to be found, in
time, German settlements. In fact the migration became so large that
German princes were frightened at the loss of so many subjects and
The majority of them were Protestants from the Rhine region, and South
Germany. Wars, religious controversies, oppression, and poverty drove
them forth to America. Though most of them were farmers, there were also
industries in Pennsylvania. Their iron, glass, paper, and woolen mills,
dotted here and there among the thickly settled regions, added to the
[Illustration: _From an old print_
A GLIMPSE OF OLD GERMANTOWN]
Unlike the Scotch-Irish, the Germans did not speak the language of the
original colonists or mingle freely with them. They kept to themselves,
built their own schools, founded their own newspapers, and published
and led to occasional agitations against "foreigners." However, no
armies side by side with soldiers from the English and Scotch-Irish
sections.
=Other Nationalities.=--Though the English, the Scotch-Irish, and the
racial strains as well, varying in numerical importance but contributing
their share to colonial life.
inflicted terrible penalties upon Protestants.
Catholic in religion. Like their Scotch-Irish neighbors to the north,
the southern and eastern shores of Ireland for the New World.
Undoubtedly thousands of their passengers were Irish of the native
stock. This surmise is well sustained by the constant appearance of
Celtic names in the records of various colonies.
[Illustration:_From an old print_
The Jews, then as ever engaged in their age-long battle for religious
and economic toleration, found in the American colonies, not complete
their right to live in any of the dominions, but owing to the easy-going
habits of the Americans they were allowed to filter into the seaboard
mayor and council of New York forbade them to sell by retail and on
another prohibited the exercise of their religious worship. Newport,
Philadelphia, and Charleston were more hospitable, and there large
Jewish colonies, consisting principally of merchants and their families,
flourished in spite of nominal prohibitions of the law.
Though the small Swedish colony in Delaware was quickly submerged
conquest in 1664. At the end of the colonial period over one-half of the
Dutch--still distinct enough to give a decided cast to the life and
manners of New York. Many of them clung as tenaciously to their mother
THE PROCESS OF COLONIZATION
emigrants, was an economic matter. It involved the use of capital to pay
=Immigrants Who Paid Their Own Way.=--Many of the immigrants to America
and paid their own passage. What proportion of the colonists were able
to finance their voyage across the sea is a matter of pure conjecture.
Undoubtedly a very considerable number could do so, for we can trace the
family fortunes of many early settlers. Henry Cabot Lodge is authority
country.... Many of the emigrants were men of wealth, as the old lists
show, and all of them, with few exceptions, were men of property and
good standing. They did not belong to the classes from which emigration
statement is or how applicable to the other colonies, no study has as
yet been made to gratify that interest. For the present it is an
cost of their own transfer to the New World.
=Indentured Servants.=--That at least tens of thousands of immigrants
were unable to pay for their passage is established beyond the shadow of
barrier in the way of the poor who wanted to go to America was the cost
of the sea voyage. To overcome this difficulty a plan was worked out
whereby shipowners and other persons of means furnished the passage
money to immigrants in return for their promise, or bond, to work for a
It is probable that the number of bond servants exceeded the original
Huguenots combined. All the way down the coast from Massachusetts to
servants was very high. The Baltimores, Penns, Carterets, and other
their fields, for land without labor was worth no more than land in the
and special efforts were made to increase the population by importing
servants. In Pennsylvania, it was not uncommon to find a master with
fifty bond servants on his estate. It has been estimated that two-thirds
of all the immigrants into Pennsylvania between the opening of the
eighteenth century and the outbreak of the Revolution were in bondage.
it formed a considerable part of the population.
The story of this traffic in white servants is one of the most striking
They likewise differed from the negro slaves in that their servitude had
a time limit. Still they were subject to many special disabilities. It
was, for instance, a common practice to impose on them penalties far
let off with a fine; a white servant guilty of the same unlawful conduct
was whipped at the post and fined as well.
The ordinary life of the white servant was also severely restricted. A
trade; nor refuse work assigned to him. For an attempt to escape or
little better than that of slaves. Loose indentures and harsh laws put
them at the mercy of their masters." It would not be unfair to add that
temper of their masters.
Old World a chance to reach the New--an opportunity to wrestle with fate
for freedom and a home of their own. When their weary years of servitude
were over, if they survived, they might obtain land of their own or
settle as free mechanics in the towns. For many a bondman the gamble
carried him. For thousands, on the contrary, bondage proved to be a real
avenue to freedom and prosperity. Some of the best citizens of America
=The Transported--Involuntary Servitude.=--In their anxiety to secure
settlers, the companies and proprietors having colonies in America
either resorted to or connived at the practice of kidnapping men, women,
and children from the streets of English cities. In 1680 it was
Virginia.
romances. Parents were separated from their children and husbands from
their wives. Hundreds of skilled artisans--carpenters, smiths, and
weavers--utterly disappeared as if swallowed up by death. A few thus
dragged off to the New World to be sold into servitude for a term of
five or seven years later became prosperous and returned home with
lived to make his way back to England and establish his claim to a
Akin to the kidnapped, at least in economic position, were convicts
deported to the colonies for life in lieu of fines and imprisonment. The
Americans protested vigorously but ineffectually against this practice.
Indeed, they exaggerated its evils, for many of the "criminals" were
only mild offenders against unduly harsh and cruel laws. A peasant
caught shooting a rabbit on a lord's estate or a luckless servant girl
who purloined a pocket handkerchief was branded as a criminal along with
sturdy thieves and incorrigible rascals. Other transported offenders
the government. This class included now Irish who revolted against
British rule in Ireland; now Cavaliers who championed the king against
monarchy was restored; and Scotch and English subjects in general who
indentured servants and whites carried to America against their will
were the African negroes brought to America and sold into slavery. When
this form of bondage was first introduced into Virginia in 1619, it was
looked upon as a temporary necessity to be discarded with the increase
who first bought negroes at the auction block intended to establish a
take firm root and become recognized as the leading source of the labor
supply. In 1650, thirty years after the introduction of slavery, there
were only three hundred Africans in Virginia.
New England. Finding it relatively easy to secure negroes in Africa,
they crowded the Southern ports with their vessels. The English Royal
to ten thousand slaves. The ship owners of New England were not far
As the proportion of the negroes to the free white population steadily
rose, and as whole sections were overrun with slaves and slave traders,
the importation by placing a duty of $5 on each slave. This effort was
futile, for the royal governor promptly vetoed it. From time to time
Carolina, in 1760, absolutely prohibited importation; but the measure
was killed by the British crown. As late as 1772, Virginia, not daunted
"The importation of slaves into the colonies from the coast of Africa
hath long been considered as a trade of great inhumanity and under its
present encouragement, we have too much reason to fear, will endanger
the very existence of Your Majesty's American dominions.... Deeply
remove all those restraints on Your Majesty's governors of this colony
pernicious a commerce."
and bounds, until on the eve of the Revolution it amounted to more than
half a million. In five states--Maryland, Virginia, the two Carolinas,
and Georgia--the slaves nearly equalled or actually exceeded the whites
population. Even in the Middle colonies of Delaware and Pennsylvania
about one-fifth of the inhabitants were from Africa. To the North, the
on the same legal footing as in the South. In New York approximately one
all unfavorable to the growth of a servile population. Still, slavery,
though sectional, was a part of the national system of economy. Northern
ships carried slaves to the Southern colonies and the produce of the
plantations to Europe. "If the Northern states will consult their
interest, they will not oppose the increase in slaves which will
increase the commodities of which they will become the carriers," said
Constitution of the United States. "What enriches a part enriches the
responded Oliver Ellsworth, the distinguished spokesman of Connecticut.
E. Charming, _History of the United States_, Vols. I and II.
J. Fiske, _Old Virginia and Her Neighbors_ (2 vols.).
A.B. Faust, _The German Element in the United States_ (2 vols.).
1. America has been called a nation of immigrants. Explain why.
2. Why were individuals unable to go alone to America in the beginning?
What agencies made colonization possible? Discuss each of them.
3. Make a table of the colonies, showing the methods employed in their
settlement.
4. Why were capital and leadership so very important in early
5. What is meant by the "melting pot"? What nationalities were
represented among the early colonists?
6. Compare the way immigrants come to-day with the way they came in
7. Contrast indentured servitude with slavery and serfdom.
Virginia in Macdonald, _Documentary Source Book of American History_,
in Macdonald, pp. 22-84. Special reference: W.A.S. Hewins, _English
Trading Companies_.
Mayflower Compact, the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut and the
Fundamental Articles of New Haven in Macdonald, pp. 19, 36, 39.
Lobingier, _The People's Law_, Chaps. I-VII.
=The Proprietary System.=--Analysis of Penn's charter of 1681, in
Macdonald, p. 80. Reference: Lodge, _Short History of the English
=Studies of Individual Colonies.=--Review of outstanding events in
history of each colony, using Elson, _History of the United States_, pp.
55-159, as the basis.
=Biographical Studies.=--John Smith, John Winthrop, William Penn, Lord
Baltimore, William Bradford, Roger Williams, Anne Hutchinson, Thomas
Hooker, and Peter Stuyvesant, using any good encyclopedia.
=Indentured Servitude.=--In Virginia, Lodge, _Short History_, pp. 69-72;
in Pennsylvania, pp. 242-244. Contemporary account in Callender,
_Economic History of the United States_, pp. 44-51. Special reference:
Karl Geiser, _Redemptioners and Indentured Servants_ (Yale Review, X,
No. 2 Supplement).
Northern colonies, pp. 241, 275, 322, 408, 442.
=The People of the Colonies.=--Virginia, Lodge, _Short History_, pp.
67-73; New England, pp. 406-409, 441-450; Pennsylvania, pp. 227-229,
240-250; New York, pp. 312-313, 322-335.
CHAPTER II
COLONIAL AGRICULTURE, INDUSTRY, AND COMMERCE
THE LAND AND THE WESTWARD MOVEMENT
deep influence on the life and culture of a people. The feudal and
aristocratic societies of Europe were founded on a system of landlordism
which was characterized by two distinct features. In the first place,
proprietor. In the second place, every estate was kept intact under the
estates and the growth of a large body of small farmers or freeholders
owning their own land. It made a form of tenantry or servitude
inevitable for the mass of those who labored on the land. It also
enabled the landlords to maintain themselves in power as a governing
political control. If land tenure was so significant in Europe, it was
equally important in the development of America, where practically all
the first immigrants were forced by circumstances to derive their
introduce in its entirety and over the whole area the system of lords
every kind of experiment in land tenure, from communism to feudalism,
was tried. In the early days of the Jamestown colony, the land, though
owned by the London Company, was tilled in common by the settlers. No
man had a separate plot of his own. The motto of the community was:
"Labor and share alike." All were supposed to work in the fields and
attempted a similar experiment, laying out the fields in common and
distributing the joint produce of their labor with rough equality among
In both colonies the communistic experiments were failures. Angry at the
lazy men in Jamestown who idled their time away and yet expected regular
river and forever banished from the fort and live there or starve." Even
the fruits of his own labor, did the colony prosper. In Plymouth, where
the communal experiment lasted for five years, the results were similar
to those in Virginia, and the system was given up for one of separate
fields in which every person could "set corn for his own particular."
labor, only to abandon the idea and go in for individual ownership of
land tenure found in the proprietary colonies, in the seaboard regions
a powerful feudal lord, owning land granted to him by royal charter. He
large or small lots. While he generally kept for himself an estate of
baronial proportions, it was impossible for him to manage directly any
sold it in parcels for lump sums or granted it to individuals on
condition that they make to him an annual payment in money, known as
"quit rent." In Maryland, the proprietor sometimes collected as high as
$9000 (equal to about $500,000 to-day) in a single year from this
source. In Pennsylvania, the quit rents brought a handsome annual
the king of England claimed all revenues collected in this form from the
land, a sum amounting to $19,000 at the time of the Revolution. The quit
rent,--"really a feudal payment from freeholders,"--was thus a material
source of income for the crown as well as for the proprietors. Wherever
irritation; and it became a formidable item in the long list of
grievances which led to the American Revolution.
Something still more like the feudal system of the Old World appeared in
companies, or the proprietors. In the colony of Maryland alone there
were sixty manors of three thousand acres each, owned by wealthy men and
tilled by tenants holding small plots under certain restrictions of
tenure. In New York also there were many manors of wide extent, most of
which originated in the days of the Dutch West India Company, when
manors were so large and populous that each was entitled to send a
York manors were in somewhat the same position as serfs on old European
estates. They were bound to pay the owner a rent in money and kind; they
power because he held court and meted out justice, in some instances
extending to capital punishment.
The manors of New York or Maryland were, however, of slight consequence
estates, far wider in expanse than many a European barony and tilled by
slaves more servile than any feudal tenants. It must not be forgotten
section and gave a decided bent to the economic and political life of
[Illustration: SOUTHERN PLANTATION MANSION]
throughout most of the North, the drift was against all forms of
servitude and tenantry and in the direction of the freehold; that is,
family. This was favored by natural circumstances and the spirit of the
labor made it impossible for the companies, the proprietors, or the
crown to develop over the whole continent a network of vast estates. In
many sections, particularly in New England, the climate, the stony soil,
moderate compass. For another thing, the English, Scotch-Irish, and
German peasants, even if they had been tenants in the Old World, did not
propose to accept permanent dependency of any kind in the New. If they
could not get freeholds, they would not settle at all; thus they forced
became the cherished unit of American farmers. The people who tilled the
farms were drawn from every quarter of western Europe; but the freehold
[Illustration: _From an old print_
A NEW ENGLAND FARMHOUSE]
same pursuit--agriculture. They had a common tie in that they both
cultivated the soil and possessed the local interest and independence
which arise from that occupation. Their methods and their culture,
however, differed widely.
labored with his own hands in the fields and forests. He sold his rice
and tobacco in large amounts directly to English factors, who took his
entire crop in exchange for goods and cash. His fine clothes,
silverware, china, and cutlery he bought in English markets. Loving the
were usually gifted slaves.
crops were not big enough to warrant direct connection with English
factors or the personal maintenance of a corps of artisans. He needed
with the rough products of their native skill. The finer goods, bought
by the rich planter in England, the small farmer ordinarily could not
buy. His wants were restricted to staples like tea and sugar, and
between him and the European market stood the merchant. His community
was therefore more self-sufficient than the seaboard line of great
plantations. It was more isolated, more provincial, more independent,
more American. The planter faced the Old East. The farmer faced the New
West.
one respect. Their land hunger was never appeased. Each had the eye of
set in westward, creeping through forests, across rivers, and over
mountains. Many of the later immigrants, in their search for cheap
breakers to the West were native Americans of the second and third
mysterious unknown, and hunters, fur traders, and squatters, following
their own sweet wills, blazed the trail, opening paths and sending back
In Massachusetts, the westward movement is recorded in the founding of
York, the inland movement was directed by the Hudson River to Albany,
and from that old Dutch center it radiated in every direction,
filled to its borders, the beginnings of the present city of New
Pennsylvania, as in New York, the waterways determined the main lines of
spread over the fertile lands of Berks and Lancaster counties, laying
out Reading in 1748. Another current of migration was directed by the
where Harrisburg was later founded. Along the southern tier of counties
a thin line of settlements stretched westward to Pittsburgh, reaching
family.
cultivation of tobacco and rice. The Piedmont Plateau, lying back from
of migration, one westward from the sea and the other southward from the
other colonies--Germans from Pennsylvania and Scotch-Irish furnishing
the main supply. "By 1770, tide-water Virginia was full to overflowing
Before the Declaration of Independence, the oncoming tide of
home-seekers had reached the crest of the Alleghanies."
[Illustration: DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION, 1790]
invasion that was about to break in upon Kentucky and Tennessee. As
early as 1769 that mighty Nimrod, Daniel Boone, curious to hunt
buffaloes, of which he had heard weird reports, passed through the
Cumberland Gap and brought back news of a wonderful country awaiting the
plow. A hint was sufficient. Singly, in pairs, and in groups, settlers
followed the trail he had blazed. A great land corporation, the
Transylvania Company, emulating the merchant adventurers of earlier
times, secured a huge grant of territory and sought profits in quit
rents from lands sold to farmers. By the outbreak of the Revolution
there were several hundred people in the Kentucky region. Like the older
fourteenth colony."
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
a steady growth in industrial and commercial pursuits. Most of the
staple industries of to-day, not omitting iron and textiles, have their
beginnings in colonial times. Manufacturing and trade soon gave rise to
towns which enjoyed an importance all out of proportion to their
originated in the days when the king of England was "lord of these
=Textile Manufacture as a Domestic Industry.=--Colonial women, in
addition to sharing every hardship of pioneering, often the heavy labor
which was almost exclusively their own. Wool and flax were raised in
serges, kerseys, and linsey-woolseys which served for the common wear."
By the close of the seventeenth century, New England manufactured cloth
in sufficient quantities to export it to the Southern colonies and to
the West Indies. As the industry developed, mills were erected for the
the Swedes of Delaware, and the Scotch-Irish of the interior "were not
The importance of this enterprise to British economic life can hardly be
woolen cloth as the chief staple in a lucrative foreign trade, and the
protection. When the colonies were established, both merchants and
statesmen naturally expected to maintain a monopoly of increasing value;
but before long the Americans, instead of buying cloth, especially of
customers, here were rivals. In the place of helpless reliance upon
to them. Even in the early years of the eighteenth century the royal
governor of New York wrote of the industrious Americans to his home
once, not only comfortably, but handsomely too, without the help of
will soon think of putting in execution designs they have long harboured
=The Iron Industry.=--Almost equally widespread was the art of iron
fifteen years after the founding of Boston. The smelting of iron began
at New London and New Haven about 1658; in Litchfield county,
Connecticut, a few years later; at Great Barrington, Massachusetts, in
1731; and near by at Lenox some thirty years after that. New Jersey had
iron works at Shrewsbury within ten years after the founding of the
colony in 1665. Iron forges appeared in the valleys of the Delaware and
the Susquehanna early in the following century, and iron masters then
laid the foundations of fortunes in a region destined to become one of
the great iron centers of the world. Virginia began iron working in the
lapsed, it was renewed and flourished in the eighteenth century.
Governor Spotswood was called the "Tubal Cain" of the Old Dominion
metallic ware, chains, anchors, bar and pig iron were made in large
quantities; and Great Britain, by an act in 1750, encouraged the
colonists to export rough iron to the British Islands.
for timbers and boards, pitch for tar and turpentine, and hemp for rope
ship was built at New Amsterdam, and by the middle of that century
shipyards were scattered along the New England coast at Newburyport,
Yards at Albany and Poughkeepsie in New York built ships for the trade
lucrative business of producing ship materials: fir, cedar, hemp, and
tar.
of agriculture was the fisheries. This industry, started by hardy
under the indomitable seamanship of the Puritans, who labored with the
fishery. Whilst we follow them among the tumbling mountains of ice and
and Davis's Straits, while we are looking for them beneath the arctic
cold, that they are at the antipodes and engaged under the frozen
the coast of Brazil. No sea but what is vexed by their fisheries. No
climate that is not witness to their toils. Neither the perseverance of
of English enterprise ever carried this most perilous mode of hard
people."
The influence of the business was widespread. A large and lucrative
for food was sold in the markets of Spain, Portugal, and Italy, or
exchanged for salt, lemons, and raisins for the American market. The
the raw materials for the thriving rum industry of New England. These
activities, in turn, stimulated shipbuilding, steadily enlarging the
demand for fishing and merchant craft of every kind and thus keeping the
towns rushed with work. They also increased trade with the mother
country for, out of the cash collected in the fish markets of Europe and
the West Indies, the colonists paid for English manufactures. So an
ever-widening circle of American enterprise centered around this single
industry, the nursery of seamanship and the maritime spirit.
=Oceanic Commerce and American Merchants.=--All through the eighteenth
until it rivaled in the number of people employed, the capital engaged,
historian has said: "The enterprising merchants of New England developed
On the one side, it involved the export of raw materials and
agricultural produce. The Southern colonies produced for shipping,
tobacco, rice, tar, pitch, and pine; the Middle colonies, grain, flour,
furs, lumber, and salt pork; New England, fish, flour, rum, furs, shoes,
and small articles of manufacture. The variety of products was in fact
American union, once remarked of colonial trade: "What sort of dish will
you make? New England will throw in fish and onions. The middle states,
flax-seed and flour. Maryland and Virginia will add tobacco. North
absurd jumble will you make if you attempt to form a union among such
On the other side, American commerce involved the import trade,
consisting principally of English and continental manufactures, tea, and
"India goods." Sugar and molasses, brought from the West Indies,
supplied the flourishing distilleries of Massachusetts, Rhode Island,
and Connecticut. The carriage of slaves from Africa to the Southern
colonies engaged hundreds of New England's sailors and thousands of
pounds of her capital.
The disposition of imported goods in the colonies, though in part
and important body of American merchants like the Willings and Morrises
of Philadelphia; the Amorys, Hancocks, and Faneuils of Boston; and the
Livingstons and Lows of New York. In their zeal and enterprise, they
they enjoyed in British markets and under the protection of the British
against outside interference.
[Illustration: THE DUTCH WEST INDIA WAREHOUSE IN NEW AMSTERDAM
Measured against the immense business of modern times, colonial commerce
seems perhaps trivial. That, however, is not the test of its
significance. It must be considered in relation to the growth of English
colonial trade in its entirety--a relation which can be shown by a few
startling figures. The whole export trade of England, including that to
Revolution, namely, in 1772, English exports to the American colonies
alone amounted to $6,024,000; in other words, almost as much as the
Pennsylvania bought in English markets goods to the value of $11,459; in
Pennsylvania imports increased fifty times within sixty-eight years,
amounting in 1772 to almost the entire export trade of England to the
colonies at the opening of the century. The American colonies were
indeed a great source of wealth to English merchants.
overland transportation difficult and costly, the many rivers and
the North and the many smaller rivers in the South made it possible for
goods to be brought from, and carried to, the interior regions in little
sailing vessels with comparative ease. Sloops laden with manufactures,
domestic and foreign, collected at some city like Providence, New York,
or Philadelphia, skirted the coasts, visited small ports, and sailed up
the navigable rivers to trade with local merchants who had for exchange
leather, tar, and ship timber. From the harbors along the Connecticut
shores there were frequent sailings down through Long Island Sound to
there grew up along the coast a number of prosperous commercial centers
which were soon reckoned among the first commercial towns of the whole
ports as Liverpool and Bristol. The statistical records of that time are
mainly guesses; but we know that Philadelphia stood first in size among
Revolution, about 25,000 inhabitants. Boston was second in rank, with
somewhat more than 20,000 people. New York, the "commercial capital of
growing at a steady rate. The fourth town in size was Charleston, South
Carolina, with about 10,000 inhabitants. Newport in Rhode Island, a
center of rum manufacture and shipping, stood fifth, with a population
towns." In the interior, Hartford in Connecticut, Lancaster and York in
Pennsylvania, and Albany in New York, with growing populations and
increasing trade, gave prophecy of an urban America away from the
seaboard. The other towns were straggling villages. Williamsburg,
Virginia, for example, had about two hundred houses, in which dwelt a
dozen families of the gentry and a few score of tradesmen. Inland county
proportion to their population. They were the centers of wealth, for one
artisans could readily take concerted action on public questions arising
gossip, religious controversy, and political discussion. In the market
places the farmers from the countryside learned of British policies and
currents of opinion which set in toward colonial nationalism and
=References=
J. Bishop, _History of American Manufactures_ (2 vols.).
P.A. Bruce, _Economic History of Virginia_ (2 vols.).
E. Semple, _American History and Its Geographical Conditions_.
W. Weeden, _Economic and Social History of New England_. (2 vols.).
system in your community with the feudal system of land tenure.
common tillage fail in colonial times?
3. Describe the elements akin to feudalism which were introduced in the
colonies.
7. What colonial industry was mainly developed by women? Why was it very
important both to the Americans and to the English?
8. What were the centers for iron working? Ship building?
9. Explain how the fisheries affected many branches of trade and
12. What were the leading towns? Did they compare in importance with
British towns of the same period?
=Research Topics=
=Land Tenure.=--Coman, _Industrial History_ (rev. ed.), pp. 32-38.
Special reference: Bruce, _Economic History of Virginia_, Vol. I, Chap.
VIII.
United States_, pp. 22-28.
Reference: J.R.H. Moore, _Industrial History of the American People_,
=Colonial Manufactures.=--Coman, pp. 63-73. Callender, pp. 29-44.
=Colonial Commerce.=--Coman, pp. 73-85. Callender, pp. 51-63, 78-84.
Chapter III
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PROGRESS
scant leisure for the cultivation of the arts and sciences. There was
little money in private purses or public treasuries to be dedicated to
and widely, and fewer still who could devote their lives to things that
delight the eye and the mind. And yet, poor and meager as the
efforts were made in every community to lift the people above the plane
of mere existence. After the first clearings were opened in the forests
those efforts were redoubled, and with lengthening years told upon the
England, of an extraordinary group of leaders familiar with history,
political philosophy, and the arts of war, government, and diplomacy
itself bore eloquent testimony to the high quality of the American
intellect. No one, not even the most critical, can run through the
Hamilton, Franklin, Washington, Madison, Marshall, Henry, the Randolphs,
and the Pinckneys--without coming to the conclusion that there was
power. Women surmounted even greater difficulties than the men in the
process of self-education, and their keen interest in public issues is
evident in many a record like the _Letters_ of Mrs. John Adams to her
THE LEADERSHIP OF THE CHURCHES
In the intellectual life of America, the churches assumed a role of high
colonies--Maryland, Pennsylvania, and New England--the religious impulse
the colonies, the clergy, at least in the beginning, formed the only
class with any leisure to devote to matters of the spirit. They preached
on Sundays and taught school on week days. They led in the discussion of
which was concerned with the relation between church and state. They
the Anglican Church was established by law. In New England the Puritans
were supreme, notwithstanding the efforts of the crown to overbear their
all of them there was a growing diversity of faith, which promised in
time a separation of church and state and freedom of opinion.
=The Church of England.=--Virginia was the stronghold of the English
prescribed by law, sustained by taxes imposed on all, and favored by the
planter who built and managed it." As in England, Catholics and
Protestant Dissenters were at first laid under heavy disabilities. Only
by the Revolution, they outnumbered the adherents of the established
order.
The Church was also sanctioned by law and supported by taxes in the
Carolinas after 1704, and in Georgia after that colony passed directly
under the crown in 1754--this in spite of the fact that the majority of
the inhabitants were Dissenters. Against the protests of the Catholics
notwithstanding the resistance of the Dutch, the Established Church was
fostered by the provincial officials, and the Anglicans, embracing about
one-fifteenth of the population, exerted an influence all out of
Many factors helped to enhance the power of the English Church in the
colonies. It was supported by the British government and the official
were appointed by the king, and its faith and service were set forth by
acts of Parliament. Having its seat of power in the English monarchy, it
counteract to some extent the independent spirit that was growing up in
Church in provincial affairs. Unhappily for their plans they failed to
calculate in advance the effect of their methods upon dissenting
Protestants, who still cherished memories of bitter religious conflicts
unity, the same could not be said of Puritanism. The Plymouth Pilgrims
had cast off all allegiance to the Anglican Church and established a
Puritans, essaying at first the task of reformers within the Church,
of union with the Anglicans. In each town a separate congregation was
organized, the male members choosing the pastor, the teachers, and the
other officers. They also composed the voters in the town meeting, where
secular matters were determined. The union of church and government was
thus complete, and uniformity of faith and life prescribed by law and
enforced by civil authorities; but this worked for local autonomy
instead of imperial unity.
The clergy became a powerful class, dominant through their learning and
the people to read--the famous Cotton Mather having three hundred and
lasted until sunset on Sunday. All work, all trading, all amusement, and
all worldly conversation were absolutely prohibited during those hours.
Puritan, thinking the sun had gone to rest, ventured forth on horseback
one Sunday evening and was luckless enough to have a ray of light strike
and fined for "his ungodly conduct." With persons accused of witchcraft
the Puritans were still more ruthless. When a mania of persecution swept
to death, many suffered imprisonment, and two died in jail.
Just about this time, however, there came a break in the uniformity of
Puritan rule. The crown and church in England had long looked upon it
the Massachusetts Bay Company. A new document issued seven years later
governor and reserved the power of appointment to the king. It also
abolished the rule limiting the suffrage to church members, substituting
for it a simple property qualification. Thus a royal governor and an
denominations, if they had the required amount of property, were
permitted to take part in elections. By this act in the name of the
crown, the Puritan monopoly was broken down in Massachusetts, and that
province was brought into line with Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New
suffrage.
=Growth of Religious Toleration.=--Though neither the Anglicans of
Virginia nor the Puritans of Massachusetts believed in toleration for
other denominations, that principle was strictly applied in Rhode
matters of conscience was established in the beginning. Maryland, by
granting in 1649 freedom to those who professed to believe in Jesus
Christ, opened its gates to all Christians; and Pennsylvania, true to
the tenets of the Friends, gave freedom of conscience to those "who
confess and acknowledge the one Almighty and Eternal God to be the
another, the Middle colonies were thus early characterized by diversity
Quakers, Baptists, Presbyterians, New Lights, Moravians, Lutherans,
Catholics, and other denominations became too strongly intrenched and
too widely scattered to permit any one of them to rule, if it had
steadily controlled by a single group. Toleration encouraged diversity,
The government and faith of the dissenting denominations conspired with
state. Presbyterians, Quakers, Baptists, and Puritans had no hierarchy
of bishops and archbishops to bind them to the seat of power in London.
helped to train them for local self-government in matters political. The
nourished as it was amid favorable circumstances in the New World, made
them all the more zealous in the defense of every right against
authority imposed from without.
SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES
=Religion and Local Schools.=--One of the first cares of each Protestant
work the Bible became the center of interest. The English version was
indeed the one book of the people. Farmers, shopkeepers, and artisans,
whose life had once been bounded by the daily routine of labor, found in
book of romance, travel, and history. "Legend and annal," says John
Richard Green, "war-song and psalm, state-roll and biography, the mighty
apocalyptic visions, all were flung broadcast over minds unoccupied for
the most part by any rival learning.... As a mere literary monument, the
English version of the Bible remains the noblest example of the English
tongue." It was the King James version just from the press that the
Pilgrims brought across the sea with them.
For the authority of the Established Church was substituted the
authority of the Scriptures. The Puritans devised a catechism based upon
their interpretation of the Bible, and, very soon after their arrival in
works and give answers to the religious questions. Massachusetts was
scarcely twenty years old before education of this character was
declared to be compulsory, and provision was made for public schools
where those not taught at home could receive instruction in reading and
     B Heaven to find,
     D The Deluge drown'd
       The Earth around.
     E ELIJAH hid
       FELIX afraid.]
little schools kept by "dames, itinerant teachers, or local parsons."
the South, we read of tiny schoolhouses, where boys, and sometimes
fathers and mothers of the better kind gave their children the rudiments
of learning. Though illiteracy was widespread, there is evidence to show
=Religion and Higher Learning.=--Religious motives entered into the
mission to the Indians and then as a college for the sons of New England
and Mary, founded in Virginia in 1693, and King's College, now Columbia
University, chartered by King George II in 1754, on an appeal from the
Philadelphia Academy, forerunner of the University of Pennsylvania,
organized by Benjamin Franklin, reflected the spirit of toleration by
giving representation on the board of trustees to several religious
sects. It was Franklin's idea that his college should prepare young men
to serve in public office as leaders of the people and ornaments to
their country.
England. Private tutoring in the home was common. In still more families
and wit, they could vie with the sons of Harvard or William and Mary or
fine record of self-education. His formal training in the classroom was
limited to a few years at a local school in Boston; but his
theology, Bunyan's works, Defoe's writings, Plutarch's _Lives_, Locke's
_On the Human Understanding_, and innumerable volumes dealing with
secular subjects. His literary style, perhaps the best of his time,
Franklin acquired by the diligent and repeated analysis of the
_Spectator_. In a life crowded with labors, he found time to read widely
in natural science and to win single-handed recognition at the hands of
he "attained an acquaintance" with Latin, Italian, French, and Spanish,
for all America at the court of the king of France.
Lesser lights than Franklin, educated by the same process, were found
all over colonial America. From this fruitful source of native ability,
the Revolution.
THE COLONIAL PRESS
=The Rise of the Newspaper.=--The evolution of American democracy into a
government by public opinion, enlightened by the open discussion of
political questions, was in no small measure aided by a free press. That
too, like education, was a matter of slow growth. A printing press was
brought to Massachusetts in 1639, but it was put in charge of an
years elapsed before the first newspaper appeared, bearing the curious
title, _Public Occurrences Both Foreign and Domestic_, and it had not
it for discussing a political question.
there came a second venture in journalism, _The Boston News-Letter_,
which proved to be a more lasting enterprise because it refrained from
Franklin's brother, James, began to issue his _New England Courant_
newspaper was enough for America. Nevertheless he continued it; and his
confidence in the future was rewarded. In nearly every colony a gazette
or chronicle appeared within the next thirty years or more. Benjamin
newspapers. Boston led with five. Philadelphia had three: two in English
and one in German.
=Censorship and Restraints on the Press.=--The idea of printing,
unlicensed by the government and uncontrolled by the church, was,
never known what it was to have the free and open publication of books,
first discovered, the control of publishing was vested in clerical
authorities. After the establishment of the State Church in England in
and no one could publish anything without previous approval of the
official censor. When the Puritans were in power, the popular party,
with a zeal which rivaled that of the crown, sought, in turn, to silence
royalist and clerical writers by a vigorous censorship. After the
restoration of the monarchy, control of the press was once more placed
in royal hands, where it remained until 1695, when Parliament, by
failing to renew the licensing act, did away entirely with the official
active and printing presses were so numerous that official review of all
published matter became a sheer impossibility.
with freedom of the press. The Puritans of Massachusetts were no less
the prying eyes of the people all literature "not mete for them to
read"; and so they established a system of official licensing for
presses, which lasted until 1755. In the other colonies where there was
impunity, they were nevertheless constantly liable to arrest for
editor of the _Mercury_ in Philadelphia was called before the
proprietary council and ordered to apologize for a political article,
and for a later offense of a similar character he was thrown into jail.
A still more famous case was that of Peter Zenger, a New York publisher,
approbation of the public was forthcoming when the lawyer for the
that of the poor printer, was on trial! The verdict for Zenger, when it
finally came, was the signal for an outburst of popular rejoicing.
Already the people of King George's province knew how precious a thing
Thanks to the schools, few and scattered as they were, and to the
vigilance of parents, a very large portion, perhaps nearly one-half, of
the colonists could read. Through the newspapers, pamphlets, and
course of public events and grasp the significance of political
around the fireside and at the taverns. When the day of resistance to
British rule came, government by opinion was at hand. For every person
who could hear the voice of Patrick Henry and Samuel Adams, there were a
Almanac_ lived to read Thomas Paine's thrilling call to arms.
THE EVOLUTION IN POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS
Two very distinct lines of development appeared in colonial politics.
England. The other, leading toward democracy and self-government, was
of government came in the war of independence.
=The Royal Provinces.=--Of the thirteen English colonies eight were
royal provinces in 1776, with governors appointed by the king. Virginia
passed under the direct rule of the crown in 1624, when the charter of
the London Company was annulled. The Massachusetts Bay corporation lost
its charter in 1684, and the new instrument granted seven years later
stripped the colonists of the right to choose their chief executive. In
the early decades of the eighteenth century both the Carolinas were
given the provincial instead of the proprietary form. New Hampshire,
trustees in 1752, went into the hands of the crown. New York,
transferred to the Duke of York on its capture from the Dutch in 1664,
became a province when he took the title of James II in 1685. New
brought directly under the king in 1702. Maryland, Pennsylvania, and
Delaware, although they retained their proprietary character until the
Revolution, were in some respects like the royal colonies, for their
retained full self-government on the eve of the Revolution. They alone
had governors and legislatures entirely of their own choosing.
high and important powers which he naturally sought to augment at every
turn. He enforced the laws and, usually with the consent of a council,
appointed the civil and military officers. He granted pardons and
reprieves; he was head of the highest court; he was commander-in-chief
of the militia; he levied troops for defense and enforced martial law in
time of invasion, war, and rebellion. In all the provinces, except
the legislature and was likely to choose those who favored his claims.
He summoned, adjourned, and dissolved the popular assembly, or the lower
house; he laid before it the projects of law desired by the crown; and
he vetoed measures which he thought objectionable. Here were in America
protested and Cromwell had battled in England.
[Illustration: THE ROYAL GOVERNOR'S PALACE AT NEW BERNE]
office-seekers and hunters for land grants. Some of them were noblemen
of broken estates who had come to America to improve their fortunes. The
pretensions of this circle grated on colonial nerves, and privileges
granted to them, often at the expense of colonists, did much to deepen
adherents of the Established Church displeased Dissenters. The
they had fled, stirred anew the ancient wrath against that combination.
=The Colonial Assembly.=--Coincident with the drift toward
tendency, namely, a steady growth in the practice of self-government.
law-making through representatives in Parliament, and the idea was early
introduced in America. Virginia was only twelve years old (1619) when
the corporation to meet at one place, the representative idea was
system under their "Fundamental Orders" of 1639, and the entire colony
considerable settlements were made. Thus by one process or another every
finally restricted to property owners or taxpayers, with a leaning
toward the freehold qualification. In Virginia, the rural voter had to
house on it, or twenty-five acres with a house twenty-five feet square.
In Massachusetts, the voter for member of the assembly under the charter
of 1691 had to be a freeholder of an estate worth forty shillings a year
Pennsylvania, the suffrage was granted to freeholders owning fifty acres
or more of land well seated, twelve acres cleared, and to other persons
Restrictions like these undoubtedly excluded from the suffrage a very
considerable number of men, particularly the mechanics and artisans of
the towns, who were by no means content with their position.
Nevertheless, it was relatively easy for any man to acquire a small
freehold, so cheap and abundant was land; and in fact a large proportion
of the colonists were land owners. Thus the assemblies, in spite of the
limited suffrage, acquired a democratic tone.
in battles with the royal and proprietary governors. When called upon by
interest of the taxpayers. It made annual, not permanent, grants of
money to pay official salaries and then insisted upon electing a
and bitter were the contests between the royal and proprietary governors
and the colonial assemblies. Franklin relates an amusing story of how
the Pennsylvania assembly held in one hand a bill for the executive to
sign and, in the other hand, the money to pay his salary. Then, with sly
humor, Franklin adds: "Do not, my courteous reader, take pet at our
legislation. It is a happy country where justice and what was your own
before can be had for ready money. It is another addition to the value
It must not be thought, however, that every governor got off as easily
Caesar, fed upon meat that made them great and steadily encroached upon
executive prerogatives as they tried out and found their strength. If
we may believe contemporary laments, the power of the crown in America
friends of the governor complained in 1747 that "the inhabitants of
royal authority remains in the Northern colonies." "Here," echoed the
governor of South Carolina, the following year, "levelling principles
prevail; the frame of the civil government is unhinged; a governor, if
he would be idolized, must betray his trust; the people have got their
assembly is by ballot; not civil posts only, but all ecclesiastical
Though baffled by the "levelling principles" of the colonial assemblies,
the governors did not give up the case as hopeless. Instead they evolved
by taxes imposed by acts of Parliament; (2) a British standing army was
to be maintained in America; (3) the remaining colonial charters were to
ministers of the crown in London. With governors, courts, and an army
independent of the colonists, they imagined it would be easy to carry
practical and logical. Nor was it founded on theory, for it came fresh
from the governors themselves. It was wanting in one respect only. It
failed to take account of the fact that the American people were growing
tutelage of the British ministry, no matter how excellent it might be or
=References=
A.M. Earle, _Home Life in Colonial Days_.
E.G. Dexter, _History of Education in the United States_.
C.A. Duniway, _Freedom of the Press in Massachusetts_.
Benjamin Franklin, _Autobiography_.
E.B. Greene, _The Provincial Governor_ (Harvard Studies).
A.E. McKinley, _The Suffrage Franchise in the Thirteen English Colonies_
(2 vols.).
=Questions=
How may leisure be secured?
2. Explain the position of the church in colonial life.
4. How did diversity of opinion work for toleration?
5. Show the connection between religion and learning in colonial times.
American spirit, in spite of a restricted suffrage?
legislatures.
Colonies_: (1) in New England, pp. 418-438, 465-475; (2) in Virginia,
pp. 54-61, 87-89; (3) in Pennsylvania, pp. 232-237, 253-257; (4) in New
York, pp. 316-321. Interesting source materials in Hart, _American
History Told by Contemporaries_, Vol. II, pp. 255-275, 276-290.
Special Reference: E.B. Greene, _The Provincial Governor_ (Harvard
=The Government of a Proprietary Colony, Pennsylvania.=--Lodge, pp.
Journalism in the United States_ (1920).
=Colonial Life in General.=--John Fiske, _Old Virginia and Her
Neighbors_, Vol. II, pp. 174-269; Elson, _History of the United States_,
=Colonial Government in General.=--Elson, pp. 210-216.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF COLONIAL NATIONALISM
It is one of the well-known facts of history that a people loosely
people torn by domestic strife, may be welded into a solid and compact
body by an attack from a foreign power. The imperative call to common
defense, the habit of sharing common burdens, the fusing force of common
service--these things, induced by the necessity of resisting outside
virulent of quarrels, temporarily at least. "Politics," runs an old
circles, applied nearly as well to the original thirteen American
days of Jamestown on through the years, the American people were
as sharp conflicts over land aroused angry passions. To the south and
the Armada, but still presenting an imposing front to the British
advance of British dominion in America.
RELATIONS WITH THE INDIANS AND THE FRENCH
=Indian Affairs.=--It is difficult to make general statements about the
relations of the colonists to the Indians. The problem was presented in
according to any coherent or uniform plan by the British government,
did the proprietors and the governors who succeeded one another, in an
necessary for dealing wisely with Indian matters. As the difficulties
were making their way with gun and ax, nearly everything that happened
was the result of chance rather than of calculation. A personal quarrel
exchange of guns for furs, personal treachery, or a flash of bad temper
On one side of the ledger may be set innumerable generous records--of
Squanto and Samoset teaching the Pilgrims the ways of the wilds; of
Roger Williams buying his lands from the friendly natives; or of William
Penn treating with them on his arrival in America. On the other side of
the ledger must be recorded many a cruel and bloody conflict as the
frontier rolled westward with deadly precision. The Pequots on the
Connecticut border, sensing their doom, fell upon the tiny settlements
with awful fury in 1637 only to meet with equally terrible punishment. A
generation later, King Philip, son of Massasoit, the friend of the
England. In 1622 Opecacano, a brother of Powhatan, the friend of the
attempted a war of extermination. In 1675 the whole frontier was ablaze.
Nathaniel Bacon vainly attempted to stir the colonial governor to put up
an adequate defense and, failing in that plea, himself headed a revolt
and a successful expedition against the Indians. As the Virginia
outposts advanced into the Kentucky country, the strife with the natives
was transferred to that "dark and bloody ground"; while to the
southeast, a desperate struggle with the Tuscaroras called forth the
combined forces of the two Carolinas and Virginia.
[Illustration: _From an old print._
From such horrors New Jersey and Delaware were saved on account of their
geographical location. Pennsylvania, consistently following a policy of
full conflict with the allied French and Indians. Georgia, by clever
negotiations and treaties of alliance, managed to keep on fair terms
with her belligerent Cherokees and Creeks. But neither diplomacy nor
generosity could stay the inevitable conflict as the frontier advanced,
especially after the French soldiers enlisted the Indians in their
[Illustration: ENGLISH, FRENCH, AND SPANISH POSSESSIONS IN AMERICA,
1750]
=Early Relations with the French.=--During the first decades of French
exploration and settlement in the St. Lawrence country, the English
to their distant neighbors. Quebec, founded in 1608, and Montreal, in
strength to be much of a menace to Boston, Hartford, or New York. It was
the statesmen in France and England, rather than the colonists in
America, who first grasped the significance of the slowly converging
sounded the first note of colonial alarm.
the Pennsylvania border. King William's War (1689-1697), Queen Anne's
War (1701-1713), and King George's War (1744-1748) owed their origins
and their endings mainly to the intrigues and rivalries of European
powers, although they all involved the American colonies in struggles
with the French and their savage allies.
=The Clash in the Ohio Valley.=--The second of these wars had hardly
closed, however, before the English colonists themselves began to be
West. Marquette and Joliet, who opened the Lake region, and La Salle,
Lawrence. A few years later they built Fort Niagara; in 1731 they
occupied Crown Point; in 1749 they formally announced their dominion
over all the territory drained by the Ohio River. Having asserted this
notoriously known to be property of the crown of Great Britain," the
BRADDOCK'S RETREAT]
shot which opened the Seven Years' War, known in America as the French
conflict that spread to Europe and even Asia and finally involved
England and Prussia, on the one side, and France, Austria, Spain, and
1755 and Wolfe's exploit in capturing Quebec four years later were the
dramatic features. On the continent of Europe, England subsidized
Prussian arms to hold France at bay. In India, on the banks of the
Ganges, as on the banks of the St. Lawrence, British arms were
that under the administration of William Pitt, the imperial genius of
flourish by war."
the Mississippi, except New Orleans, passed under the British flag. The
remainder of the Louisiana territory was transferred to Spain and French
exchange for Havana, which the British had seized during the war, Spain
ceded to King George the colony of Florida. Not without warrant did
THE EFFECTS OF WARFARE ON THE COLONIES
The various wars with the French and the Indians, trivial in detail as
they seem to-day, had a profound influence on colonial life and on the
American people, more eager to be busy in their fields or at their
trades, were simply forced to raise and support armies, to learn the
arts of warfare, and to practice, if in a small theater, the science of
tenaciously provincial in their habits, in the direction of nationalism.
the problems presented by the Indian and French menace that the
Americans took the first steps toward union. Though there were many
colonies so united were bound together in "a firm and perpetual league
some twenty years the Confederation was active and it continued to hold
meetings until after the extinction of the Indian peril on the immediate
border.
Virginia, no less than Massachusetts, was aware of the importance of
Old Dominion began treaties of commerce and amity with New York and the
with the agents of New York and Massachusetts to discuss problems of
mutual defense. A few years later the Old Dominion cooperated loyally
with the Carolinas in defending their borders against Indian forays.
=The Albany Plan of Union.=--An attempt at a general colonial union was
made in 1754. On the suggestion of the Lords of Trade in England, a
measures of defense against the French, and to enter into "articles of
union and confederation for the general defense of his Majesty's
war." New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York,
Pennsylvania, and Maryland were represented. After a long discussion, a
plan of union, drafted mainly, it seems, by Benjamin Franklin, was
scheme and the king disapproved it for the reason, Franklin said, that
it had "too much weight in the democratic part of the constitution."
Though the Albany union failed, the document is still worthy of study
because it forecast many of the perplexing problems that were not solved
also Franklin was a member drafted the Constitution of the United
=The Military Education of the Colonists.=--The same wars that showed
the provincials the meaning of union likewise instructed them in the art
French and Indian conflict, which stretched all the way from Maine to
it is admitted, was far from satisfactory to the British government and
the conduct of the militiamen was far from professional; but thousands
of Americans got a taste, a strong taste, of actual fighting in the
field. Men like George Washington and Daniel Morgan learned lessons that
could do under favorable circumstances and they watched British regulars
operating on American soil. "This whole transaction," shrewdly remarked
Franklin of Braddock's campaign, "gave us Americans the first suspicion
that our exalted ideas of the prowess of British regular troops had not
who drew his sword under the elm at Cambridge and took command of the
whistle of bullets" at the memorable battle in western Pennsylvania.
=Financial Burdens and Commercial Disorder.=--While the provincials were
learning lessons in warfare they were also paying the bills. All the
conflicts were costly in treasure as in blood. King Philip's war left
New England weak and almost bankrupt. The French and Indian struggle was
the colonies were sustained only by huge outlays of money. Paper
was driven from its usual channels and prices were enhanced. When the
end came, both England and America were staggering under heavy
liabilities, and to make matters worse there was a fall of prices
accompanied by a commercial depression which extended over a period of
ten years. It was in the midst of this crisis that measures of taxation
had to be devised to pay the cost of the war, precipitating the quarrel
which led to American independence.
=The Expulsion of French Power from North America.=--The effects of the
estimate. Some British statesmen regarded it as a happy circumstance
foreign power at hand to aid them in case they struck for independence.
though defeated, was not out of the sphere of American influence; for,
as events proved, it was the fortunate French alliance negotiated by
Franklin that assured the triumph of American arms in the War of the
Revolution.
COLONIAL RELATIONS WITH THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT
It was neither the Indian wars nor the French wars that finally brought
independence. The forces that created this nation did not operate in the
colonies alone. The character of the English sovereigns, the course of
events in English domestic politics, and English measures of control
over the colonies--executive, legislative, and judicial--must all be
taken into account.
(1649-60) so engrossed the attention of Englishmen at home that they had
little time to think of colonial policies or to interfere with colonial
affairs. The restoration of the monarchy in 1660, accompanied by
internal peace and the increasing power of the mercantile classes in the
House of Commons, changed all that. In the reign of Charles II
(1660-85), himself an easy-going person, the policy of regulating trade
by act of Parliament was developed into a closely knit system and
powerful agencies to supervise the colonies were created. At the same
time a system of stricter control over the dominions was ushered in by
much self-government on the Puritans.
Charles' successor, James II, a man of sterner stuff and jealous of his
authority in the colonies as well as at home, continued the policy thus
inaugurated and enlarged upon it. If he could have kept his throne, he
would have bent the Americans under a harsh rule or brought on in his
He determined to unite the Northern colonies and introduce a more
made a martinet, Sir Edmund Andros, governor of all New England, New
Connecticut would have been seized if it had not been spirited away and
For several months, Andros gave the Northern colonies a taste of
ill-tempered despotism. He wrung quit rents from land owners not
opinion, they were unlawful; he forced the Episcopal service upon the
Old South Church in Boston; and he denied the writ of _habeas corpus_ to
of his arbitrary course, however, his hand was stayed. The news came
that King James had been dethroned by his angry subjects, and the people
dispose of Andros. The response was prompt and hearty. The hated
guard.
The overthrow of James, followed by the accession of William and Mary
and by assured parliamentary supremacy, had an immediate effect in the
given another charter which, though not so liberal as the first,
affairs was resumed.
Queen Anne, the successor of King William, the throne passed to a
whose combined reigns extended from 1714 to 1760, never even learned to
speak the English language, at least without an accent. The necessity of
Moreover, during a large part of this period, the direction of affairs
was in the hands of an astute leader, Sir Robert Walpole, who betrayed
sleeping dogs lie." He revealed his appreciation of popular sentiment
sea.
James II to George III ventured to interfere with colonial matters
king's council to meet on Mondays and Thursdays of each week to consider
to examine acts of colonial legislatures, to recommend measures to those
assemblies for adoption, and to hear memorials and petitions from the
colonies relative to their affairs.
The methods employed by this board were varied. All laws passed by
If it found an act unsatisfactory, it recommended to the king the
who believed his personal or property rights injured by a colonial law
could be heard by the board in person or by attorney; in such cases it
therefore, a formal affair, but was constantly employed on the
suggestion of a highly efficient agency of the crown. All this was in
=Judicial Control.=--Supplementing this administrative control over the
king, by virtue of his inherent authority, claimed and exercised high
appellate powers over all judicial tribunals in the empire. The right
on the eve of the Revolution, maintained in every colony. Any subject in
England or America, who, in the regular legal course, was aggrieved by
could, and frequently did, declare acts of colonial legislatures duly
enacted and approved, null and void, on the ground that they were
colonial affairs was in operation. At one time the British governors in
the colonies were ordered not to approve any colonial law imposing a
Carolina laid a tax on peddlers, the council objected to it as
throughout the continent." At other times, Indian trade was regulated in
the interests of the whole empire or grants of lands by a colonial
legislature were set aside. Virginia was forbidden to close her ports to
North Carolina lest there should be retaliation.
In short, foreign and intercolonial trade were subjected to a control
A superior judicial power, towering above that of the colonies, as the
colonial legislatures within the metes and bounds of established law. In
the thousands of appeals, memorials, petitions, and complaints, and the
rulings and decisions upon them, were written the real history of
So great was the business before the Lords of Trade that the colonies
common grievances against the operation of this machinery of control
enterprise. Only a powerful blow was needed to weld these bodies into a
common mass nourishing the spirit of colonial nationalism. When to the
repeated minor irritations were added general and sweeping measures of
=Parliamentary Control over Colonial Affairs.=--As soon as Parliament
gained in power at the expense of the king, it reached out to bring the
Charles I and the accession of George III, there was enacted an immense
America. All of it, based on the "mercantile" theory then prevalent in
all countries of Europe, was designed to control the overseas
interests of the mother country, where merchants and men of finance had
got the upper hand. According to this theory, the colonies of the
British empire should be confined to agriculture and the production of
British colonial policy must be placed the navigation laws framed for
the purpose of building up the British merchant marine and navy--arms so
it was worked out into a system early in the reign of Charles II
(1660-85).
British ships. No trade could be carried on between Great Britain and
colonists, compelling them to pay higher freight rates. The adverse
the master builders of America an advantage over those of the mother
policy written into the Navigation Acts.
deliberately aimed to prevent colonial industries from competing too
goods from the colonies and even the woolen trade between towns and
colonies. When Parliament learned, as the result of an inquiry, that New
and Portugal, it enacted in 1732 a law declaring that "no hats or felts,
dyed or undyed, finished or unfinished" should be "put upon any vessel
whatever." The effect of this measure upon the hat industry was almost
engine for slitting or rolling of iron, no plating forge to work with a
tilt hammer, and no furnace for making steel" should be built in the
nuisances and ordered closed. Thus three important economic interests of
ban.
_The Trade Laws._--The third group of restrictive measures passed by the
1663 required the colonies to export certain articles to Great Britain
or to her dominions alone; while sugar, tobacco, and ginger consigned to
the continent of Europe had to pass through a British port paying custom
duties and through a British merchant's hands paying the usual
coming mainly from the British West Indies. In the course of time,
however, other commodities were added to the list of enumerated
hides, iron, lumber, and pearl ashes. This was not all. The colonies
were compelled to bring their European purchases back through English
ports, paying duties to the government and commissions to merchants
again.
_The Molasses Act._--Not content with laws enacted in the interest of
British West Indies against competition from their French and Dutch
with the French islands in the West Indies and Dutch Guiana, where sugar
on the protests of English planters in the Barbadoes and Jamaica,
French and Dutch if the law had been enforced. The duties, however, were
not collected. The molasses and sugar trade with the foreigners went on
merrily, smuggling taking the place of lawful traffic.
of her colonial trade which Spain consistently sought to maintain, the
restrictive laws were supplemented by many measures intended to be
favorable to colonial prosperity. The Navigation Acts, for example,
redounded to the advantage of American shipbuilders and the producers
of hemp, tar, lumber, and ship stores in general. Favors in British
ports were granted to colonial producers as against foreign competitors
colonial enterprise. Taken all in all, there is much justification in
colonists gained more than they lost by British trade and industrial
legislation. Certainly after the establishment of independence, when
free from these old restrictions, the Americans found themselves
handicapped by being treated as foreigners rather than favored traders
and the recipients of bounties in English markets.
against the mother country on account of the trade and navigation laws
enacted previous to the close of the French and Indian war. Relatively
few were engaged in the hat and iron industries as compared with those
the inhabitants. The woolen industry was largely in the hands of women
and carried on in connection with their domestic duties, so that it was
not the sole support of any considerable number of people.
relating to trade, were not rigidly enforced. Cargoes of tobacco were
boldly sent to continental ports without even so much as a bow to the
English government, to which duties should have been paid. Sugar and
molasses from the French and Dutch colonies were shipped into New
restraints of trade" until after the French war, when the British
In the period between the landing of the English at Jamestown, Virginia,
a century and a half--a new nation was being prepared on this continent
migration. Western Europe contributed emigrants of many races and
nationalities. The English led the way. Next to them in numerical
of negroes were brought from Africa to till Southern fields or labor as
domestic servants in the North.
Why did they come? The reasons are various. Some of them, the Pilgrims
and Puritans of New England, the French Huguenots, Scotch-Irish and
Irish, and the Catholics of Maryland, fled from intolerant governments
that denied them the right to worship God according to the dictates of
their consciences. Thousands came to escape the bondage of poverty in
negroes from Africa, were dragged here against their will. The lure of
enterprising merchants.
and borrowed or furnished the funds necessary to pay the way. In other
was the wealthy proprietor, like Lord Baltimore or William Penn, who
undertook to plant settlements. Many immigrants were able to pay their
own way across the sea. Others bound themselves out for a term of years
in exchange for the cost of the passage. Negroes were brought on account
of the profits derived from their sale as slaves.
Whatever the motive for their coming, however, they managed to get
across the sea. The immigrants set to work with a will. They cut down
schools, and colleges. They set up forges and workshops. They spun and
wove. They fashioned ships and sailed the seas. They bartered and
commerce--Boston, Providence, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and
they pressed westward until, by the close of the colonial period, they
Though they were widely scattered along a thousand miles of seacoast,
wilderness. To ties of kinship and language were added ties created by
necessity. They had to unite in defense; first, against the Indians and
later against the French. They were all subjects of the same
Many of the things which tended to unite them likewise tended to throw
them into opposition to the British Crown and Parliament. Most of them
Church of England, that stanch defender of the British monarchy. Each
grew accustomed to making laws and laying taxes for itself. Here was a
people learning self-reliance and self-government. The attempts to
colonies into royal provinces only fanned the spirit of independence
wiping out their settlements. Though their manufacture and trade were
controlled in the interests of the mother country, they also enjoyed
earth; but the broad empire of Britain was open to American ships and
which the colonists suffered through British regulation of their
industry and trade were more than offset by the privileges they enjoyed.
Still that is somewhat beside the point, for mere economic advantage is
not necessarily the determining factor in the fate of peoples. A
thousand circumstances had helped to develop on this continent a nation,
to inspire it with a passion for independence, and to prepare it for a
destiny greater than that of a prosperous dominion of the British
empire. The economists, who tried to prove by logic unassailable that
America would be richer under the British flag, could not change the
spirit of Patrick Henry, Samuel Adams, Benjamin Franklin, or George
Washington.
=References=
G.L. Beer, _Origin of the British Colonial System_ and _The Old Colonial
System_.
H. Egerton, _Short History of British Colonial Policy_.
F. Parkman, _France and England in North America_ (12 vols.).
R. Thwaites, _France in America_ (American Nation Series).
J. Winsor, _The Mississippi Valley_ and _Cartier to Frontenac_.
1. How would you define "nationalism"?
2. Can you give any illustrations of the way that war promotes
5. Enumerate the five chief results of the wars with the French and the
Hanoverians.
8. Explain how the English Crown, Courts, and Parliament controlled the
9. Name the three important classes of English legislation affecting the
colonies. Explain each.
10. Do you think the English legislation was beneficial or injurious to
the colonies? Why?
=Research Topics=
=Rise of French Power in North America.=--Special reference: Francis
=The French and Indian Wars.=--Special reference: W.M. Sloane, _French
War and the Revolution_, Chaps. VI-IX. Parkman, _Montcalm and Wolfe_,
171-196.
=English Navigation Acts.=--Macdonald, _Documentary Source Book_, pp.
55, 72, 78, 90, 103. Coman, _Industrial History_, pp. 79-85.
=British Colonial Policy.=--Callender, _Economic History of the United
States_, pp. 102-108.
_Source Book_, p. 45. Special reference: Fiske, _Beginnings of New
England_, pp. 140-198.
=Biographical Studies.=--William Pitt and Sir Robert Walpole. Consult
Green, _Short History of England_, on their policies, using the index.
PART II. CONFLICT AND INDEPENDENCE
THE NEW COURSE IN BRITISH IMPERIAL POLICY
On October 25, 1760, King George II died and the British crown passed to
even learned to speak the language of the land over which he reigned.
their reign, the principle had become well established that the king did
Parliament.
=The Character of the New King.=--The third George rudely broke the
German tradition of his family. He resented the imputation that he was a
To the draft of his first speech to Parliament, he added the popular
high royal prerogative, said of George: "The young king was a born
Englishman. All his tastes and habits, good and bad, were English. No
portion of his subjects had anything to reproach him with.... His age,
his appearance, and all that was known of his character conciliated
pleasing; scandal imputed to him no vice; and flattery might without
Nevertheless George III had been spoiled by his mother, his tutors, and
his courtiers. Under their influence he developed high and mighty
notions about the sacredness of royal authority and his duty to check
mother had dinned into his ears the slogan: "George, be king!" Lord
Bute, his teacher and adviser, had told him that his honor required him
laws. Thus educated, he surrounded himself with courtiers who encouraged
him in the determination to rule as well as reign, to subdue all
parties, and to place himself at the head of the nation and empire.
[Illustration: _From an old print._
GEORGE III]
=Political Parties and George III.=--The state of the political parties
freeholders, merchants, inhabitants of towns, and Protestant
non-conformists, had grown haughty and overbearing through long
continuance in power and had as a consequence raised up many enemies in
their own ranks. Their opponents, the Tories, had by this time given up
still cherished their old notions about divine right. With the
accession of George III the coveted opportunity came to them to rally
around the throne again. George received his Tory friends with open
arms, gave them offices, and bought them seats in the House of Commons.
=The British Parliamentary System.=--The peculiarities of the British
Parliament at the time made smooth the way for the king and his allies
with their designs for controlling the entire government. In the first
place, the House of Lords was composed mainly of hereditary nobles whose
number the king could increase by the appointment of his favorites, as
popular vote, they did not speak for the mass of English people. Great
towns like Leeds, Manchester, and Birmingham, for example, had no
in Great Britain, there were in 1768 only about 160,000 voters; that is
to say, only about one in every ten adult males had a voice in the
government. Many boroughs returned one or more members to the Commons
voters at all. Furthermore, these tiny boroughs were often controlled by
lords who openly sold the right of representation to the highest bidder.
The "rotten-boroughs," as they were called by reformers, were a public
the House of Commons.
GEORGE III'S MINISTERS AND THEIR COLONIAL POLICIES
=Grenville and the War Debt.=--Within a year after the accession of
direction of affairs was entrusted to men enjoying the king's
cost of government.
The first task after the conclusion of peace in 1763 was the adjustment
point in the history of the country. More revenue was absolutely
necessary and Grenville began to search for it, turning his attention
finally to the American colonies. In this quest he had the aid of a
zealous colleague, Charles Townshend, who had long been in public
requisitions from the king to the colonial assemblies for supplies, but
that the colonies were to be taxed instead by act of Parliament.
=Restriction of Paper Money (1763).=--Among the many complaints filed
paper money by the colonial legislatures. The new ministry provided a
remedy in the act of 1763, which declared void all colonial laws
law was aimed at the "cheap money" which the Americans were fond of
English creditors in return for goods and in payment of the interest and
principal of debts. Thus the first chapter was written in the long
=Limitation on Western Land Sales.=--Later in the same year (1763)
for the government of the territory recently acquired by the treaty of
Paris from the French. One of the provisions in this royal decree
officers and the colonists over the disposition of western lands had
settlement. The more adventurous were continually moving west and
"squatting" on land purchased from the Indians or simply seized without
authority. To put an end to this, the king forbade all further purchases
and dispose of them for settlement. A second provision in the same
including the lucrative fur business, in the hands of royal officers in
the colonies. These two limitations on American freedom and enterprise
were declared to be in the interest of the crown and for the
=The Sugar Act of 1764.=--King George's ministers next turned their
America, nothing seemed more reasonable to them than the proposition
that the colonies should help to bear the burden which fell so heavily
upon the English taxpayer. The Sugar Act of 1764 was the result of this
set forth clearly in the title: "An act for granting certain duties in
the British colonies and plantations in America ... for applying the
produce of such duties ... towards defraying the expenses of defending,
protecting and securing the said colonies and plantations ... and for
from the said colonies and plantations and improving and securing the
prohibitive; the Sugar Act of 1764 was clearly intended as a revenue
measure. Specified duties were laid upon sugar, indigo, calico, silks,
and many other commodities imported into the colonies. The enforcement
of the Molasses Act had been utterly neglected; but this Sugar Act had
"teeth in it." Special precautions as to bonds, security, and
registration of ship masters, accompanied by heavy penalties, promised
a vigorous execution of the new revenue law.
measures. Under a law of the previous year the commanders of armed
vessels stationed along the American coast were authorized to stop,
search, and, on suspicion, seize merchant ships approaching colonial
ports. By supplementary orders, the entire British official force in
navigation laws. Revenue collectors, officers of the army and navy, and
royal governors were curtly ordered to the front to do their full duty
naval officers who seized offenders against the law were rewarded by
large prizes out of the forfeitures and penalties.
=The Stamp Act (1765).=--The Grenville-Townshend combination moved
in Parliament, Grenville announced a plan for a stamp bill. The next
its authors. The vote in the Commons stood 205 in favor to 49 against;
while in the Lords it was not even necessary to go through the formality
royal assent by a commission acting as a board of regency. Protests of
from all appearances the Stamp Act hardly roused as much as a languid
interest in the city of London. In fact, it is recorded that the fateful
measure attracted less notice than a bill providing for a commission to
The Stamp Act, like the Sugar Act, declared the purpose of the British
government to raise revenue in America "towards defraying the expenses
plantations in America." It was a long measure of more than fifty
sections, carefully planned and skillfully drawn. By its provisions
duties were imposed on practically all papers used in legal
licenses to practice law and sell liquor, on college diplomas, playing
advertisements. The drag net was closely knit, for scarcely anything
Act would rouse opposition in America--how great they could not
conjecture. While the measure was being debated, a friend of General
warning in the Commons. "Believe me--remember I this day told you so--"
he exclaimed, "the same spirit of freedom which actuated that people at
first will accompany them still ... a people jealous of their liberties
answer of the ministry to a prophecy of force was a threat of force.
Stamp Act when Parliament passed the Quartering Act ordering the
COLONIAL RESISTANCE FORCES REPEAL
=Popular Opposition.=--The Stamp Act was greeted in America by an
outburst of denunciation. The merchants of the seaboard cities took the
lead in making a dignified but unmistakable protest, agreeing not to
import British goods while the hated law stood upon the books. Lawyers,
some of them incensed at the heavy taxes on their operations and others
papers, joined with the merchants. Aristocratic colonial Whigs, who had
long grumbled at the administration of royal governors, protested
against taxation without their consent, as the Whigs had done in old
of them of the official class--who denounced the merchants, lawyers, and
Whig aristocrats as "seditious, factious and republican." Yet the
In a little while it was taken up in the streets and along the
countryside. All through the North and in some of the Southern colonies,
artisans, mechanics, and laborers; and the latter, patriotic women. Both
groups were alike in that they had as yet taken little part in public
affairs. Many artisans, as well as all the women, were excluded from the
right to vote for colonial assemblymen.
high royal officers. They organized committees of inquisition who by
threats and intimidation curtailed the sale of British goods and the use
to such excesses that many mild opponents of the stamp tax were
effective resistance to the sale of the hated goods by spurring on
of clothing, and devising substitutes for taxed foods. They helped to
=Legislative Action against the Stamp Act.=--Leaders in the colonial
assemblies, accustomed to battle against British policies, supported the
the Virginia House of Burgesses passed a set of resolutions declaring
that the General Assembly of the colony alone had the right to lay taxes
upon the inhabitants and that attempts to impose them otherwise were
"illegal, unconstitutional, and unjust." It was in support of these
resolutions that Patrick Henry uttered the immortal challenge: "Caesar
had his Brutus, Charles I his Cromwell, and George III...." Cries of
and sent representatives. The delegates, while professing the warmest
acts were burdensome and grievous; and that the right to petition the
supplication" for the repeal of the Stamp Act.
The Stamp Act Congress was more than an assembly of protest. It marked
the rise of a new agency of government to express the will of America.
It was the germ of a government which in time was to supersede the
government of George III in the colonies. It foreshadowed the Congress
of the United States under the Constitution. It was a successful attempt
at union. "There ought to be no New England men," declared Christopher
Gadsden, in the Stamp Act Congress, "no New Yorkers known on the
Continent, but all of us Americans."
=The Repeal of the Stamp Act and the Sugar Act.=--The effect of American
had been effectively boycotted by the Americans; ships lay idly swinging
Bristol, and Liverpool. Workingmen in the manufacturing towns of England
reaping, in place of the coveted revenue, rebellion.
Perplexed by the storm they had raised, the ministers summoned to the
bar of the House of Commons, Benjamin Franklin, the agent for
Pennsylvania, who was in London. "Do you think it right," asked
part of the expenses?" The answer was brief: "That is not the case; the
colonies raised, clothed, and paid during the last war twenty-five
that military force might compel obedience to law. Franklin had a ready
The repeal of the Stamp Act was moved in the House of Commons a few days
later. The sponsor for the repeal spoke of commerce interrupted, debts
workingmen unemployed, oppression instituted, and the loss of the
of his career, the latter just beginning his, argued cogently in favor
"America must learn," he wailed, "that prayers are not to be brought to
restored to his right mind.
In rescinding the Stamp Act, Parliament did not admit the contention of
accompanied the repeal with a Declaratory Act. It announced that the
colonies were subordinate to the crown and Parliament of Great Britain;
laws binding the colonies in all cases whatsoever; and that the
null and void.
demonstrations. Bells were rung; toasts to the king were drunk; and
resolution, did not disturb the good humor of those who again cheered
the name of King George. Their confidence was soon strengthened by the
news that even the Sugar Act had been repealed, thus practically
RESUMPTION OF BRITISH REVENUE AND COMMERCIAL POLICIES
seated in the House of Lords as the Earl of Chatham, his severe illness
gave to Townshend and the Tory party practical control over Parliament.
Unconvinced by the experience with the Stamp Act, Townshend brought
forward and pushed through both Houses of Parliament three measures,
restrictive laws was that of June 29, 1767, which placed the enforcement
of the collection of duties and customs on colonial imports and exports
in the hands of British commissioners appointed by the king, resident in
control by the colonists. The second measure of the same date imposed a
the colonies, the revenue derived from the duties to be applied toward
tea trade which the Americans carried on illegally with foreigners. This
law abolished the duty which the East India Company had to pay in
merchants might thus find it possible to undersell American tea
=Writs of Assistance Legalized by Parliament.=--Had Parliament been
content with laying duties, just as a manifestation of power and right,
and neglected their collection, perhaps little would have been heard of
harsh, enforcement of the law. It ordered customs officers to remain at
1767, it expressly authorized the superior courts of the colonies to
issue "writs of assistance," empowering customs officers to enter "any
house, warehouse, shop, cellar, or other place in the British colonies
smuggled goods.
revenue officers, was an ancient device hateful to a people who
cherished the spirit of personal independence and who had made actual
gains in the practice of civil liberty. To allow a "minion of the law"
to enter a man's house and search his papers and premises, was too much
for the emotions of people who had fled to America in a quest for
self-government and free homes, who had braved such hardships to
establish them, and who wanted to trade without official interference.
The writ of assistance had been used in Massachusetts in 1755 to prevent
illicit trade with Canada and had aroused a violent hostility at that
time. In 1761 it was again the subject of a bitter controversy which
arose in connection with the application of a customs officer to a
Massachusetts court for writs of assistance "as usual." This application
was vainly opposed by James Otis in a speech of five hours' duration--a
speech of such fire and eloquence that it sent every man who heard it
his head and another his throne, a tyrant's device which placed the
liberty of every man in jeopardy, enabling any petty officer to work
possible malice on any innocent citizen on the merest suspicion, and to
spread terror and desolation through the land. "What a scene," he
exclaimed, "does this open! Every man, prompted by revenge, ill-humor,
writ of assistance. Others will ask it from self-defense; one arbitrary
could not establish it because it was against the British constitution.
echoed by the people. Then and there James Otis sounded the call to
customs officers in his grim determination to enforce the law.
=The New York Assembly Suspended.=--In the very month that Townshend's
Acts were signed by the king, Parliament took a still more drastic step.
insupportable" expense involved, had failed to make provision for the
obey the law. It was not until a third election was held that compliance
with the Quartering Act was wrung from the reluctant province. In the
meantime, all the colonies had learned on how frail a foundation their
=The Massachusetts Circular (1768).=--Massachusetts, under the
leadership of Samuel Adams, resolved to resist the policy of renewed
Circular Letter addressed to the assemblies of the other colonies
informing them of the state of affairs in Massachusetts and roundly
Parliament had no right to lay taxes on Americans without their consent
and that the colonists could not, from the nature of the case, be
represented in Parliament. It went on shrewdly to submit to
who were subjected to governors and judges appointed by the crown and
[Illustration: _From an old print._
SAMUEL ADAMS]
=The Dissolution of Assemblies.=--The governor of Massachusetts, hearing
meeting refusal, he promptly dissolved it. The Maryland, Georgia, and
dissolved at once. The Virginia House of Burgesses, thoroughly aroused,
passed resolutions on May 16, 1769, declaring that the sole right of
imposing taxes in Virginia was vested in its legislature, asserting anew
persons accused of crimes or trial beyond the seas, and beseeching the
king for a redress of the general grievances. The immediate dissolution
of the Virginia assembly, in its turn, was the answer of the royal
governor.
=The Boston Massacre.=--American opposition to the British authorities
the centers of discontent. Merchants again agreed not to import British
goods, the Sons of Liberty renewed their agitation, and women set about
On the night of March 5, 1770, a crowd on the streets of Boston began to
jostle and tease some British regulars stationed in the town. Things
went from bad to worse until some "boys and young fellows" began to
crowd, killing five and wounding half a dozen more. The day after the
"massacre," a mass meeting was held in the town and Samuel Adams was
sent to demand the withdrawal of the soldiers. The governor hesitated
and tried to compromise. Finding Adams relentless, the governor yielded
The Boston Massacre stirred the country from New Hampshire to Georgia.
Popular passions ran high. The guilty soldiers were charged with murder.
offenders entitled to their full rights in law. In his speech to the
jury, however, Adams warned the British government against its course,
saying, that "from the nature of things soldiers quartered in a populous
town will always occasion two mobs where they will prevent one." Two of
the soldiers were convicted and lightly punished.
=Resistance in the South.=--The year following the Boston Massacre some
citizens of North Carolina, goaded by the conduct of the royal governor,
who were taken prisoners were hanged as traitors. A little later royal
troops and local militia met in a pitched battle near Alamance River,
called the "Lexington of the South."
=The _Gaspee_ Affair and the Virginia Resolutions of 1773.=--On sea as
well as on land, friction between the royal officers and the colonists
vessel and, after seizing the crew, set it on fire. A royal commission,
account, failed because it could not find a single informer. The very
appointment of such a commission aroused the patriots of Virginia to
creating a standing committee of correspondence to develop cooperation
Townshend revenue act a failure, repealed in 1770 all the duties except
that on tea, it in no way relaxed its resolve to enforce the other
financial difficulties into which it had fallen partly by reason of the
all tea transshipped to America. A small impost of three pence, to be
collected in America, was left as a reminder of the principle laid down
in the Declaratory Act that Parliament had the right to tax the
colonists.
colonists for several reasons. It was an act of favoritism for one
thing, in the interest of a great monopoly. For another thing, it
cheap tea and so cause heavy losses to American merchants who had large
stocks on hand. It threatened with ruin the business of all those who
were engaged in clandestine trade with the Dutch. It carried with it an
irritating tax of three pence on imports. In Charleston, Annapolis, New
York, and Boston, captains of ships who brought tea under this act were
disguised as Indians, boarded the hated tea ships and dumped the cargo
into the harbor. This was serious business, for it was open, flagrant,
RETALIATION BY THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT
=Reception of the News of the Tea Riot.=--The news of the tea riot in
stated with evident satisfaction. "The colonies must either triumph or
meek." Lord George Germain characterized the tea party as "the
proceedings of a tumultuous and riotous rabble who ought, if they had
Lord North, who had then for three years been the king's chief minister.
Even Pitt, Lord Chatham, was prepared to support the government in
upholding its authority.
passed five stringent measures, known in American history as the five
"intolerable acts." They were aimed at curing the unrest in America. The
the councilors should be appointed by the king, that all judges should
be named by the royal governor, and that town meetings (except to elect
certain officers) could not be held without the governor's consent. A
_third_ measure, after denouncing the "utter subversion of all lawful
government" in the provinces, authorized royal agents to transfer to
persons accused of murder in connection with the enforcement of the law.
The _fourth_ act legalized the quartering of troops in Massachusetts
towns. The _fifth_ of the measures was the Quebec Act, which granted
The intolerable acts went through Parliament with extraordinary
celerity. There was an opposition, alert and informed; but it was
ineffective. Burke spoke eloquently against the Boston port bill,
condemning it roundly for punishing the innocent with the guilty, and
was heard with respect and his pleas were rejected. The bill passed both
journals although it did not accurately represent the state of opinion.
The law destroying the charter of Massachusetts passed the Commons by a
vote of three to one; and the third intolerable act by a vote of four to
one. The triumph of the ministry was complete. "What passed in Boston,"
exclaimed the great jurist, Lord Mansfield, "is the overt act of High
In the colonies the laws were received with consternation. To the
project they viewed not as an act of grace or of mercy but as a direct
either at home or in Ireland and the Americans could see no good motive
large claims in the territory thus annexed to Quebec.
To enforce these intolerable acts the military arm of the British
Massachusetts. Reinforcements were brought to the colonies, for now King
=The Doctrine of Natural Rights.=--The dissolution of assemblies, the
destruction of charters, and the use of troops produced in the colonies
a new phase in the struggle. In the early days of the contest with the
and condemned the acts of Parliament as unlawful, as violating the
principles of the English constitution under which they all lived. When
for support to their "natural rights." The latter doctrine, in the form
in which it was employed by the colonists, was as English as the
constitutional argument. John Locke had used it with good effect in
the hour of their distress. They openly declared that their rights did
crown. "Old Magna Carta was not the beginning of all things," retorted
inherent, and inseparable rights of the colonists as men and as citizens
would remain and whatever became of charters can never be abolished
impetuous Alexander Hamilton. "The sacred rights of mankind," he
obscured by mortal power."
Firm as the American leaders were in the statement and defense of their
rights, there is every reason for believing that in the beginning they
hoped to confine the conflict to the realm of opinion. They constantly
avowed that they were loyal to the king when protesting in the strongest
firebrand, was in fact attempting to avert revolution by winning
concessions from England. "I argue this cause with the greater
pleasure," he solemnly urged in his speech against the writs of
assistance, "as it is in favor of British liberty ... and as it is in
opposition to a kind of power, the exercise of which in former periods
cost one king of England his head and another his throne."
=Burke Offers the Doctrine of Conciliation.=--The flooding tide of
American sentiment was correctly measured by one Englishman at least,
Edmund Burke, who quickly saw that attempts to restrain the rise of
saw how fixed and rooted in the nature of things was the American
spirit--how inevitable, how irresistible. He warned his countrymen that
there were three ways of handling the delicate situation--and only
three. One was to remove the cause of friction by changing the spirit of
the colonists--an utter impossibility because that spirit was grounded
prosecute American leaders as criminals; of this he begged his
countrymen to beware lest the colonists declare that "a government
against which a claim of liberty is tantamount to high treason is a
government to which submission is equivalent to slavery." The third and
=Events Produce the Great Decision.=--The right way, indicated by Burke,
was equally impossible to George III and the majority in Parliament. To
resistance unlawful, riotous, and treasonable. The correct way, in their
view, was to dispatch more troops to crush the "rebels"; and that very
"Facts are stubborn things." Opinions were unseen, but marching soldiers
Morris, "the sheep, simple as they are, cannot be gulled as heretofore."
It was too late to talk about the excellence of the British
constitution. If any one is bewildered by the controversies of modern
historians as to why the crisis came at last, he can clarify his
R. Frothingham, _Rise of the Republic_.
G.E. Howard, _Preliminaries of the Revolution_ (American Nation Series).
J.K. Hosmer, _Samuel Adams_.
J.T. Morse, _Benjamin Franklin_.
M.C. Tyler, _Patrick Henry_.
J.A. Woodburn (editor), _The American Revolution_ (Selections from the
=Questions=
1. Show how the character of George III made for trouble with the
colonies.
the plans of George III.
3. How did the state of English finances affect English policy?
4. Enumerate five important measures of the English government affecting
6. Show how England renewed her policy of regulation in 1767.
7. Summarize the events connected with American resistance.
8. With what measures did Great Britain retaliate?
9. Contrast "constitutional" with "natural" rights.
10. What solution did Burke offer? Why was it rejected?
=Research Topics=
=Powers Conferred on Revenue Officers by Writs of Assistance.=--See a
writ in Macdonald, _Source Book_, p. 109.
Assign one to each student for report and comment.
=Source Studies on the Stamp Act.=--Hart, _American History Told by
Contemporaries_, Vol. II, pp. 394-412.
=Source Studies of the Townshend Acts.=--Hart, Vol. II, pp. 413-433.
=American Principles.=--Prepare a table of them from the Resolutions of
the Stamp Act Congress and the Massachusetts Circular. Macdonald, pp.
136-146.
=An English Historian's View of the Period.=--Green, _Short History of
=English Policy Not Injurious to America.=--Callender, _Economic
People_, Vol. II, pp. 129-170.
=The Opening of the Revolution.=--Elson, _History of the United States_,
pp. 220-235.
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
RESISTANCE AND RETALIATION
character. To local committees and provincial conventions was added a
Continental Congress, appropriately called by Massachusetts on June 17,
was electric. By hurried and irregular methods delegates were elected
during the summer, and on September 5 the Congress duly assembled in
Carpenter's Hall in Philadelphia. Many of the greatest men in America
were there--George Washington and Patrick Henry from Virginia and John
and Samuel Adams from Massachusetts. Every shade of opinion was
represented. Some were impatient with mild devices; the majority favored
The Congress drew up a declaration of American rights and stated in
approved the resistance to British measures offered by Massachusetts and
independence but firmly attacking the policies pursued by the British
and the enforcement of this agreement it placed in the hands of local
voters. The significance of this action is obvious. Congress threw
itself athwart British law. It made a rule to bind American citizens and
The colonists, who up to this moment had been wavering, had to choose
one authority or the other. They were for the enforcement of the
of a second Congress, should necessity require.
American Congress reached England, Pitt and Burke warmly urged a repeal
of the obnoxious laws, but in vain. All they could wring from the prime
to relieve from taxation any colony that would assume its share of
imperial defense and make provision for supporting the local officers of
the crown. This "olive branch" was accompanied by a resolution assuring
=Bloodshed at Lexington and Concord (April 19, 1775).=--Meanwhile the
stores had been collected at Concord, dispatched a small force to seize
At Lexington, on the road to Concord, occurred "the little thing" that
produced "the great event." An unexpected collision beyond the thought
battle field.
was actually at hand, the second Continental Congress, which met at
Philadelphia in May, 1775, was not yet convinced that conciliation was
colonists in order that the empire might avoid the calamities of civil
unsatisfactory because it did not renounce the right to tax or repeal
=Force, the British Answer.=--Just as the representatives of America
August 23, 1775, George III issued a proclamation of rebellion. This
civil and military powers to bring "the traitors to justice"; and it
threatened with "condign punishment the authors, perpetrators, and
"God, save the king." Later in the year, Parliament passed a sweeping
act destroying all trade and intercourse with America. Congress was
silent at last. Force was also America's answer.
=Drifting into War.=--Although the Congress had not given up all hope of
to defend American rights by arms if necessary. It transformed the
militiamen who had assembled near Boston, after the battle of Lexington,
into a Continental army and selected Washington as commander-in-chief.
It assumed the powers of a government and prepared to raise money, wage
war, and carry on diplomatic relations with foreign countries.
[Illustration: _From an old print_
SPIRIT OF 1776]
in drumming up recruits for its army in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
the British government concluded a treaty with the Landgrave of
of soldiers and many pieces of cannon. This was the crowning insult to
of the water. Such was, long afterward, the judgment of the conservative
historian Lecky: "The conduct of England in hiring German mercenaries to
=The Growth of Public Sentiment in Favor of Independence.=--Events were
bearing the Americans away from their old position under the British
desires, prudent and honorable men, who cherished the ties that united
revolution, were drawn into the path that led to the great decision. In
all parts of the country and among all classes, the question of the hour
was being debated. "American independence," as the historian Bancroft
assembly. It had been discussed in every part of the country by farmers
and merchants, by mechanics and planters, by the fishermen along the
pulpit; at social gatherings and around the camp fires; in county
assemblies."
[Illustration: _From an old print_
THOMAS PAINE]
=Paine's "Commonsense."=--In the midst of this ferment of American
opinion, a bold and eloquent pamphleteer broke in upon the hesitating
without apologies. In the early days of 1776, Thomas Paine issued the
British monarchy and an equally passionate plea for American liberty.
addressed George III, Paine went to the other extreme and assailed him
British constitution under which colonists had been claiming their
rights, he brushed it aside as ridiculous, protesting that it was "owing
to the constitution of the people, not to the constitution of the
Having thus summarily swept away the grounds of allegiance to the old
order, Paine proceeded relentlessly to an argument for immediate
separation from Great Britain. There was nothing in the sphere of
in behalf of independence. "Our corn will fetch its price in any market
in Europe and our imported goods must be paid for, buy them where we
to do this continent justice; the business of it will soon be too
weighty and intricate to be managed with any tolerable degree of
convenience by a power so distant from us and so very ignorant of us."
There is accordingly no alternative to independence for America.
"Everything that is right or natural pleads for separation. The blood of
the slain, the weeping voice of nature cries ''tis time to part.' ...
Arms, the last resort, must decide the contest; the appeal was the
choice of the king and the continent hath accepted the challenge.... The
sun never shone on a cause of greater worth. 'Tis not the affair of a
city, a county, a province or a kingdom, but of a continent.... 'Tis not
the concern of a day, a year or an age; posterity is involved in the
proceedings now. Now is the seed-time of Continental union, faith, and
honor.... O! ye that love mankind! Ye that dare oppose not only the
extinct. Let none other be heard among us than those of a good citizen,
mankind and of the free and independent states of America." As more than
100,000 copies were scattered broadcast over the country, patriots
exclaimed with Washington: "Sound doctrine and unanswerable reason!"
idea of independence began to come from many quarters. On the tenth of
February, 1776, Gadsden, in the provincial convention of South Carolina,
advocated a new constitution for the colony and absolute independence
for all America. The convention balked at the latter but went half way
others shrank. It empowered its representatives in the Congress to
concur with the delegates of the other colonies in declaring
independence. Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and Virginia quickly
15, instructed its delegates at Philadelphia to propose the independence
separation. When the resolution was carried the British flag on the
Meanwhile the Continental Congress was alive to the course of events
outside. The subject of independence was constantly being raised. "Are
we rebels?" exclaimed Wyeth of Virginia during a debate in February.
"No: we must declare ourselves a free people." Others hesitated and
avoided the direct word. A few more weeks elapsed. At last, on May 10,
Congress declared that the authority of the British crown in America
their own.
INDEPENDENCE TO THE COMMITTEE OF CONGRESS]
on June 7, the Virginia delegation in the Congress moved that "these
united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent
states." A committee was immediately appointed to draft a formal
document setting forth the reasons for the act, and on July 2 all the
of the Declaration of Independence, changed in some slight particulars,
out the glad tidings; couriers swiftly carried the news to the uttermost
hamlet and farm. A new nation announced its will to have a place among
To some documents is given immortality. The Declaration of Independence
is one of them. American patriotism is forever associated with it; but
the records of time. The secret of its greatness lies in the simple fact
ideal which for three centuries has been taking form and spreading
sentence: "Governments derive their just powers from the consent of the
governed."
Written in a "decent respect for the opinions of mankind," to set forth
Britain, the Declaration contained a long list of "abuses and
government and giving a new dignity to the common man that has become a
household phrase in the Old World as in the New.
from the standpoint of the old system of government, were the essence of
revolution: (1) all men are created equal and are endowed by their
Creator with certain unalienable rights including life, liberty, and the
rights; (3) governments derive their just powers from the consent of the
governed; (4) whenever any form of government becomes destructive of
these ends it is the right of the people to alter or abolish it and
institute new government, laying its foundations on such principles and
effect their safety and happiness. Here was the prelude to the historic
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF GOVERNMENT AND THE NEW ALLEGIANCE
=The Committees of Correspondence.=--As soon as debate had passed into
armed resistance, the patriots found it necessary to consolidate their
the means were at hand in town meetings, provincial legislatures, and
committees of correspondence. The working tools of the Revolution were
in fact the committees of correspondence--small, local, unofficial
groups of patriots formed to exchange views and create public sentiment.
under the leadership of Samuel Adams. It held regular meetings, sent
emissaries to neighboring towns, and carried on a campaign of education
DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE]
Upon local organizations similar in character to the Boston committee
revolutionary elements. Ordinarily the provincial convention was merely
the old legislative assembly freed from all royalist sympathizers and
controlled by patriots. Finally, upon these colonial assemblies was
United States. This was the revolutionary government set up within the
=State Constitutions Framed.=--With the rise of these new assemblies of
the people, the old colonial governments broke down. From the royal
and it became necessary to substitute patriot authorities. The appeal to
themselves, issued by the Congress in May, 1776, was quickly acted upon.
Before the expiration of a year, Virginia, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, Maryland, Georgia, and New York had drafted new constitutions
as states, not as colonies uncertain of their destinies. Connecticut and
needs, merely renounced their allegiance to the king and went on as
before so far as the form of government was concerned. South Carolina,
complete constitution in 1778. Two years later Massachusetts with much
models. For the royal governor was substituted a governor or president
chosen usually by the legislature; but in two instances, New York and
substituted, except in Georgia, a senate; while the lower house, or
assembly, was continued virtually without change. The old property
restriction on the suffrage, though lowered slightly in some states, was
constitutions, for governors, senators, and representatives, indicated
that the revolutionary leaders were not prepared for any radical
Adams of Massachusetts and Mrs. Henry Corbin of Virginia, against a
government which excluded them from political rights were treated as
By the new state constitutions the signs and symbols of royal power, of
and republican governments on an imposing scale presented for the first
time to the modern world. Copies of these remarkable documents prepared
a generation of constitution-makers whose mission it was to begin the
democratic revolution in the Old World.
was an easy task for the revolutionary leaders. They had only to build
had had little experience in its operation. When the supervision of the
crown of Great Britain was suddenly broken, the patriot leaders,
accustomed merely to provincial statesmanship, were poorly trained for
Many forces worked against those who, like Franklin, had a vision of
and industry in the North and the planting system of the South. There
were contests over the apportionment of taxes and the quotas of troops
for common defense. To these practical difficulties were added local
provincial dignity, and the scarcity of men with a large outlook upon
Nevertheless, necessity compelled them to consider some sort of
before the most sagacious leaders began to urge the desirability of a
into a committee of the whole on the state of the union, and Franklin,
undaunted by the fate of his Albany plan of twenty years before, again
and it was not until late in 1777 that Congress presented to the states
the Articles of Confederation. Provincial jealousies delayed
ratification, and it was the spring of 1781, a few months before the
states, approved the Articles. This plan of union, though it was all
Congress of delegates in which each state had an equal voice and gave it
government--money and soldiers.
taken in the direction of independent government, the patriots devised
the new nation in the process of making. When the first Continental
agencies were duly formed by the choice of men favoring the scheme, all
opponents being excluded from the elections. Before these bodies those
who persisted in buying British goods were summoned and warned or
punished according to circumstances. As soon as the new state
same way to ferret out all who were not outspoken in their support of
the new order of things.
[Illustration: MOBBING THE TORIES]
These patriot agencies, bearing different names in different sections,
were sometimes ruthless in their methods. They called upon all men to
one time held the former governor of New Jersey and the mayor of New
York. Thousands were black-listed and subjected to espionage. The
black-list of Pennsylvania contained the names of nearly five hundred
suppressed and their pamphlets burned. In many places, particularly in
sometimes supplemented by mob violence. A few Tories were hanged without
trial, and others were tarred and feathered. One was placed upon a cake
Whole families were driven out of their homes to find their way as best
they could within the British lines or into Canada, where the British
government gave them lands. Such excesses were deplored by Washington,
but they were defended on the ground that in effect a civil war, as well
as a war for independence, was being waged.
were to be citizens of the new republic were separated from those who
preferred to be subjects of King George. Just what proportion of the
Americans favored independence and what share remained loyal to the
British monarchy there is no way of knowing. The question of revolution
conflicting evidence. On the patriot side, there is the testimony of a
of the people were for the American cause and not more than one-third
opposed the Revolution at all stages.
On behalf of the loyalists, or Tories as they were popularly known,
extravagant claims were made. Joseph Galloway, who had been a member of
Britain upon constitutional principles to independence." At the same
king's government to the Congress' tyranny." In an address to the king
of Americans in his Majesty's army exceeded the number of troops
enlisted by Congress to oppose them."
more than a thousand people fled with him. This great company, according
of banishment passed by Massachusetts in 1778, listing over 300 Tories,
"reads like the social register of the oldest and noblest families of
New England," more than one out of five being graduates of Harvard
College. The same was true of New York and Philadelphia; namely, that
clergymen and wealthy merchants. With passion the loyalists fought
against the inevitable or with anguish of heart they left as refugees
for a life of uncertainty in Canada or the mother country.
=Tories Assail the Patriots.=--The Tories who remained in America joined
cause. Those who were skillful with the pen assailed the patriots in
editorials, rhymes, satires, and political catechisms. They declared
bankrupt shopkeepers, outlawed smugglers, etc." The people and their
leaders they characterized as "wretched banditti ... the refuse and
rank and honor nearly on a par with those of the Congress."
=Patriot Writers Arouse the National Spirit.=--Stung by Tory taunts,
patriot writers devoted themselves to creating and sustaining a public
opinion favorable to the American cause. Moreover, they had to combat
the depression that grew out of the misfortunes in the early days of the
winter of 1775 as they attempted to bring Canada into the revolution--a
disaster that cost 5000 men; repeated calamities harassed Washington in
beaten at Harlem Heights and White Plains. These reverses were almost
too great for the stoutest patriots.
of the hour. John Witherspoon, provost of the College of New Jersey,
the spirit of liberty in many a stirring poem. Songs, ballads, plays,
and satires flowed from the press in an unending stream. Fast days,
battle anniversaries, celebrations of important steps taken by Congress
afforded to patriotic clergymen abundant opportunities for sermons.
Adams in a letter to his wife. The answer was decisive. "The clergy of
every denomination, not excepting the Episcopalian, thunder and lighten
every Sabbath. They pray for Boston and Massachusetts. They thank God
most explicitly and fervently for our remarkable successes. They pray
Washington when they retreated from Fort Lee and were harried from New
army as well as on the public. In December, 1776, he made a second great
appeal to his countrymen in his pamphlet, "The Crisis," the first part
of which he had written while defeat and gloom were all about him. This
tract was a cry for continued support of the Revolution. "These are the
times that try men's souls," he opened. "The summer soldier and the
sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his
country; but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of men
and women." Paine laid his lash fiercely on the Tories, branding every
one as a coward grounded in "servile, slavish, self-interested fear." He
deplored the inadequacy of the militia and called for a real army. He
hope.... Look on this picture and weep over it." His ringing call to
over.
MILITARY AFFAIRS
=The Two Phases of the War.=--The war which opened with the battle of
Lexington, on April 19, 1775, and closed with the surrender of
Cornwallis at Yorktown on October 19, 1781, passed through two distinct
1778, and the second until the end of the struggle. During the first
phase, the war was confined mainly to the North. The outstanding
features of the contest were the evacuation of Boston by the British,
the expulsion of American forces from New York and their retreat through
British (September, 1777), the invasion of New York by Burgoyne and his
capture at Saratoga in October, 1777, and the encampment of American
France on February 6, 1778, was confined mainly to the Middle states,
were the withdrawal of the British from Philadelphia, the battle of
Monmouth, and the inclosure of the British in New York by deploying
country, secured Kaskaskia and Vincennes and laid a firm grip on the
country between the Ohio and the Great Lakes. In the South, the second
Charleston, administered a crushing defeat to the American forces under
coast, took charge of British forces engaged in plundering Virginia, and
sea and the combined French and American forces on land.
=The Geographical Aspects of the War.=--For the British the theater of
Massachusetts to Georgia, a distance of almost a thousand miles. It was
nearly three thousand miles from the main base of supplies and, though
sea, on the other hand, offered an easy means of transportation between
the approach of the French fleet; and they captured and held both
of cities.
portion of the American people lived in towns. Countrymen back from the
coast were in no way dependent upon them for a livelihood. They lived on
gave strength to them in the contest. Whenever the British ventured far
from the ports of entry, they encountered reverses. Burgoyne was forced
base of supplies. As soon as the British got away from Charleston, they
were harassed and worried by the guerrilla warriors of Marion, Sumter,
and Pickens. Cornwallis could technically defeat Greene at Guilford far
in the interior; but he could not hold the inland region he had invaded.
Sustained by their own labor, possessing the interior to which their
armies could readily retreat, supplied mainly from native resources, the
Americans could not be hemmed in, penned up, and destroyed at one fell
off American trade, but control of the sea did not seriously affect the
not such a vital matter. All the materials for a comfortable though
somewhat rude life were right at hand. It made little difference to a
cut off. This was an evil to which submission was necessary.
Nor did the brilliant exploits of John Paul Jones and Captain John Barry
seamen and their courage as fighting men. They raised the rates of
British marine insurance, but they did not dethrone the mistress of the
hundreds of privateers and minor captains who overhauled British supply
reckon seriously with the enemy on the sea and make plans based upon the
difficult to compare the contending forces in the revolutionary contest.
French War and was accounted an excellent officer, a strict
disciplinarian, and a gallant gentleman. Nevertheless he loved ease,
society, and good living, and his expulsion from Boston, his failure to
and Philadelphia, destroyed every shred of his military reputation. John
Burgoyne, to whom was given the task of penetrating New York from
Europe. He had, however, a touch of the theatrical in his nature and
after the collapse of his plans and the surrender of his army in 1777,
he devoted his time mainly to light literature. Sir Henry Clinton, who
had "learned his trade on the continent," and was regarded as a man of
discretion and understanding in military matters. Lord Cornwallis, whose
Yorktown, had seen service in the Seven Years' War and had undoubted
talents which he afterward displayed with great credit to himself in
India. Though none of them, perhaps, were men of first-rate ability,
they all had training and experience to guide them.
The Americans had a host in Washington himself. He had long been
interested in military strategy and had tested his coolness under fire
during the first clashes with the French nearly twenty years before. He
the British generals. He was a stern but reasonable disciplinarian. He
depression at reverses. In the dark hour of the Revolution, "what held
the patriot forces together?" asks Beveridge in his _Life of John
such as the "Conway cabal," the cowardice of Lee at Monmouth, even the
breast and aroused him to make passionate pleas to his countrymen, did
not shake his iron will or his firm determination to see the war through
to the bitter end. The weight of Washington's moral force was
immeasurable.
been experienced military men when the war opened. Benedict Arnold, the
him to battle. Horatio Gates was looked upon as a "seasoned soldier"
because he had entered the British army as a youth, had been wounded at
Years' War; but he was the most conspicuous failure of the Revolution.
The triumph over Burgoyne was the work of other men; and his crushing
defeat at Camden put an end to his military pretensions. Nathanael
Greene was a Rhode Island farmer and smith without military experience
who, when convinced that war was coming, read Caesar's _Commentaries_ and
Carolina whose sole passage at arms had been a brief but desperate brush
with the Indians ten or twelve years earlier. Daniel Morgan, one of the
some fighting during the French and Indian War, but his military
knowledge, from the point of view of a trained British officer, was
Hampshire, and a major in the local militia when duty summoned him to
read a few books on war, raised a regiment, and offered himself for
service. Such is the story of the chief American military leaders, and
it is typical of them all. Some had seen fighting with the French and
Indians, but none of them had seen warfare on a large scale with regular
during the Revolution all those qualities counted heavily in the
balance.
military talent from beyond the seas. Baron Steuben, well schooled in
Washington at Valley Forge, and day after day drilled and manoeuvered the
men, laughing and cursing as he turned raw countrymen into regular
soldiers. From France came young Lafayette and the stern De Kalb, from
siege of Savannah and De Kalb at Camden. Kosciusko survived the American
war to defend in vain the independence of his native land. To these
distinguished foreigners, who freely threw in their lot with American
revolutionary fortunes, was due much of that spirit and discipline which
fitted raw recruits and temperamental militiamen to cope with a military
power of the first rank.
=The Soldiers.=--As far as the British soldiers were concerned their
were sent over at the opening of the contest, the recruits drummed up
by special efforts at home, and the thousands of Hessians bought
British officers. These common soldiers were far away from home and
enlisted for the war. Nearly all of them were well disciplined and many
their own kin; but they obeyed orders.
determination, as men fighting for their homes, were lacking in
discipline and in the experience of regular troops. When the war broke
in upon them, there were no common preparations for it. There was no
continental army; there were only local bands of militiamen, many of
them experienced in fighting but few of them "regulars" in the military
sense. Moreover they were volunteers serving for a short time,
unaccustomed to severe discipline, and impatient at the restraints
lamented Washington, "come in, you cannot tell how; go, you cannot tell
where; consume your provisions; exhaust your stores; and leave you at
last at a critical moment."
Again and again Washington begged Congress to provide for an army of
regulars enlisted for the war, thoroughly trained and paid according to
some definite plan. At last he was able to overcome, in part at least,
reluctant body an agreement to grant half pay to all officers and a
scheme, which Washington regarded as far short of justice to the
soldiers, did not produce quick results. It was near the close of the
Though there were times when militiamen and frontiersmen did valiant and
forces of regulars in a seven years' war for independence. They did
Plains, Germantown, and Camden. Not once did an army of militiamen
overcome an equal number of British regulars in an open trial by battle.
"To bring men to be well acquainted with the duties of a soldier," wrote
undisciplined recruits as from veteran soldiers is to expect what never
did and perhaps never will happen."
one thing there were delays and blunders on the part of the British
generals who, in 1775 and 1776, dallied in Boston and New York with
large bodies of regular troops when they might have been dealing
army. "Nothing but the supineness or folly of the enemy could have saved
this apparent supineness was not all due to the British generals. The
ministers behind them believed that a large part of the colonists were
loyal and that compromise would be promoted by inaction rather than by a
war vigorously prosecuted. Victory by masterly inactivity was obviously
about the practical conduct of campaigns. All along, the British were
embarrassed by the problem of supplies. Their troops could not forage
with the skill of militiamen, as they were in unfamiliar territory. The
long oversea voyages were uncertain at best and doubly so when the
boats.
The British were in fact battered and worn down by a guerrilla war and
outdone on two important occasions by superior forces--at Saratoga and
Yorktown. Stern facts convinced them finally that an immense army, which
the colonies if that hazardous enterprise could be accomplished at all.
They learned also that America would then be alienated, fretful, and the
price which staggered even Lord North and George III. Moreover, there
=Women and the War.=--At no time were the women of America indifferent
opinion they did their part in creating public sentiment. Mrs. Elizabeth
espouse the cause of the province. Far to the north the sister of James
upon their natural rights, and in influential circles she urged the
leaders to stand fast by their principles. While John Adams was tossing
about with uncertainty at the Continental Congress, his wife was writing
letters to him declaring her faith in "independency."
sustaining public sentiment they were active. Mrs. Warren with a
tireless pen combatted loyalist propaganda in many a drama and satire.
Almost every revolutionary leader had a wife or daughter who rendered
service in the "second line of defense." Mrs. Washington managed the
plantation while the General was at the front and went north to face the
rigors of the awful winter at Valley Forge--an inspiration to her
Bache, while her father was pleading the American cause in France, set
near the firing line women were to be found, aiding the wounded, hauling
In the economic sphere, the work of women was invaluable. They harvested
labor in spinning and weaving it is recorded: "Immediately on being cut
off from the use of English manufactures, the women engaged within their
own families in manufacturing various kinds of cloth for domestic use.
They thus kept their households decently clad and the surplus of their
labors they sold to such as chose to buy rather than make for
and strict economy frequently supported the whole domestic circle,
evincing the strength of their attachment and the value of their
tribute to them for the inspiration and material aid which they had
When the Revolution opened, there were thirteen little treasuries in
America but no common treasury, and from first to last the Congress was
in the position of a beggar rather than a sovereign. Having no authority
to lay and collect taxes directly and knowing the hatred of the
provincials for taxation, it resorted mainly to loans and paper money to
finance the war. "Do you think," boldly inquired one of the delegates,
to the printer and get a wagon load of money, one quire of which will
economy, Congress issued in June, 1776, two million dollars in bills of
credit to be redeemed by the states on the basis of their respective
states added nearly $210,000,000 of their own notes. Then came
desperation a national lottery was held, producing meager results. The
$16,000,000. Begging letters were sent to the states asking them to
with their own affairs, gave little heed.
rapidly declined in purchasing power until in 1779 a dollar was worth
Congress and the states to compel people to accept the notes at face
Speculators collected at once to fatten on the calamities of the
securities while the patriot army, half clothed, was freezing at Valley
Washington, "afford too many melancholy proofs of the decay of public
war were added the labors of private citizens. Hayn Solomon, a merchant
of Philadelphia, supplied members of Congress, including Madison,
half a million dollars to the American cause and died broken in purse,
financier" because he labored night and day to find the money to meet
the bills which poured in upon the bankrupt government. When his own
funds were exhausted, he borrowed from his friends. Experienced in the
distribute supplies to the troops, thus displaying administrative as
well as financial talents.
Women organized "drives" for money, contributed their plate and their
yielding them a penny. Thus by the labors and sacrifices of citizens,
borrowings in Europe, and the impressment of supplies, the Congress
staggered through the Revolution like a pauper who knows not how his
kindly fate.
supplies, the writers who sustained the American spirit, and the women
fairly well versed in European history. They knew of the balance of
1775 and prepared to send agents abroad.
=American Agents Sent Abroad.=--Having heard that France was inclining a
Most Christian Majesty the King of France." John Jay of New York was
chosen minister to Spain in 1779; John Adams was sent to Holland the
same year; and other agents were dispatched to Florence, Vienna, and
Berlin. The representative selected for St. Petersburg spent two
Silesian linens and woolens, but, fearing England's command of the sea,
=Early French Interest.=--The great diplomatic triumph of the Revolution
was won at Paris, and Benjamin Franklin was the hero of the occasion,
XVI's foreign minister, Count de Vergennes, before the arrival of any
colonies. He showed him how France could redress her grievances and
Louisiana, Isle Royale, Acadia, and Senegal." Equally successful in
Beaumarchais, a man of wealth, a lover of music, and the author of two
popular plays, "Figaro" and "The Barber of Seville." These two men had
=Franklin at Paris.=--When Franklin reached Paris, he was received only
however, made manifest their affection for the "plain republican" in
"his full dress suit of spotted Manchester velvet." He was known among
kingdom. People of all ranks--ministers, ladies at court, philosophers,
peasants, and stable boys--knew of Franklin and wished him success in
his mission. The queen, Marie Antoinette, fated to lose her head in a
revolution soon to follow, played with fire by encouraging "our dear
republican."
For the king of France, however, this was more serious business. England
resented the presence of this "traitor" in Paris, and Louis had to be
cautious about plunging into another war that might also end
was a dark hour for the American Revolution. Washington's brilliant
exploit at Trenton on Christmas night, 1776, and the battle with
Cornwallis at Princeton had been followed by the disaster at Brandywine,
the loss of Philadelphia, the defeat at Germantown, and the retirement
to Valley Forge for the winter of 1777-78. New York City and
Philadelphia--two strategic ports--were in British hands; the Hudson
and Delaware rivers were blocked; and General Burgoyne with his British
cutting New England off from the rest of the colonies. No wonder the
king was cautious. Then the unexpected happened. Burgoyne, hemmed in
parties beaten back, his supplies cut off, surrendered on October 17,
1777, to General Gates, who had superseded General Schuyler in time to
receive the honor.
=Treaties of Alliance and Commerce (1778).=--News of this victory,
placed by historians among the fifteen decisive battles of the world,
sat gloomily at dinner. Beaumarchais, who was with him, grasped at once
such haste that he upset his coach and dislocated his arm. The king and
in February, 1778. The independence of the United States was recognized
by France and an alliance was formed to guarantee that independence.
declared war on England. Men who had, a few short years before, fought
one another in the wilderness of Pennsylvania or on the Plains of
had erected and that George III was pulling down.
the steady decline of her sea power since the days of the Armada and
concert of nations against England. Holland, a member of a league of
seas, sent her fleet to unite with the forces of Spain, France, and
America to prey upon British commerce. To all this trouble for England
was added the danger of a possible revolt in Ireland, where the spirit
=The British Offer Terms to America.=--Seeing the colonists about to be
joined by France in a common war on the English empire, Lord North
proposed, in February, 1778, a renewal of negotiations. By solemn
of imposing taxes within the colonies; at the same time it authorized
suspended, and the old imperial constitution, as it stood before the
had taken the affairs of America out of the hands of British
commissioners and diplomats.
=Effects of French Aid.=--The French alliance brought ships of war,
body of trained soldiers to the aid of the Americans. Timely as was this
help, it meant no sudden change in the fortunes of war. The British
evacuated Philadelphia in the summer following the alliance, and
Washington's troops were encouraged to come out of Valley Forge. They
conduct of General Charles Lee prevented a triumph. The recovery of
The full effect of the French alliance was not felt until 1781, when
French troops Washington swept rapidly southward and penned the British
to the shore while a powerful French fleet shut off their escape by sea.
without French aid, that put an end to all chance of restoring British
dominion in America. It was the surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown that
caused Lord North to pace the floor and cry out: "It is all over! It is
all over!" What might have been done without the French alliance lies
hidden from mankind. What was accomplished with the help of French
earth. "All the world agree," exultantly wrote Franklin from Paris to
General Washington, "that no expedition was ever better planned or
better executed. It brightens the glory that must accompany your name to
reward.
PEACE AT LAST
the final discomfiture of King George and Lord North, it is necessary to
remember that from the beginning to the end the British ministry at home
faced a powerful, informed, and relentless opposition. There were
vigorous protests, first against the obnoxious acts which precipitated
William Pitt, Earl of Chatham, though he deplored the idea of American
independence, denounced the government as the aggressor and rejoiced in
giving independence to America, would work for reconciliation rather
sympathy and warmly championed their rights. Outside of the circle of
statesmen there were stout friends of the American cause like David
Hume, the philosopher and historian, and Catherine Macaulay, an author
of wide fame and a republican bold enough to encourage Washington in
seeing it through.
    "King George, in a fright
     Thought no way so sure
     His pen to secure
=Lord North Yields.=--As time wore on, events bore heavily on the side
conquest was impossible, and they had urged the advantages of a peace
arguments. Moreover, the war, which sprang out of an effort to relieve
were daily increasing. Trade with the colonies, the greatest single
outlet for British goods and capital, was paralyzed. The heavy debts due
British merchants in America were not only unpaid but postponed into an
had a dangerous fleet on the high seas. In vain did the king assert in
December, 1781, that no difficulties would ever make him consent to a
February 27, 1782, in the House of Commons was carried an address to the
throne against continuing the war. Burke, Fox, the younger Pitt, Barre,
and other friends of the colonies voted in the affirmative. Lord North
In April, 1782, Franklin received word from the English government that
it was prepared to enter into negotiations leading to a settlement. This
was embarrassing. In the treaty of alliance with France, the United
States had promised that peace should be a joint affair agreed to by
commissioners conferred with the British agents at Paris without
neglecting _bienseance_ [good manners] but hoped that the great work
would not be ruined by a single indiscretion."
=The Terms of Peace (1783).=--The general settlement at Paris in 1783
was a triumph for America. England recognized the independence of the
United States, naming each state specifically, and agreed to boundaries
extending from the Atlantic to the Mississippi and from the Great Lakes
to the Floridas. England held Canada, Newfoundland, and the West Indies
intact, made gains in India, and maintained her supremacy on the seas.
gained nothing important save the satisfaction of seeing England humbled
forth surprise and gratitude in the United States and smoothed the way
for a renewal of commercial relations with the mother country. At the
master. "A day will come when it will be a giant; even a colossus
from all the nations. In a few years we shall watch with grief the
tyrannical existence of the same colossus."
[Illustration: NORTH AMERICA ACCORDING TO THE TREATY OF 1783]
SUMMARY OF THE REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD
power; but no one could fix the hour of the great event. Until 1763 the
were collisions from time to time, of course. Royal governors clashed
with stiff-necked colonial legislatures. There were protests against the
exercise of the king's veto power in specific cases. Nevertheless, on
more amicable in 1763 than at any period under the Stuart regime which
closed in 1688.
the product of a number of forces that happened to converge about 1763.
proud, inexperienced, and stubborn king. For nearly fifty years his
be king in fact as well as in name. About the same time England brought
to a close the long and costly French and Indian War and was staggering
under a heavy burden of debt and taxes. The war had been fought partly
to English statesmen than the idea that the colonies should bear part of
prominence, in royal councils, two men bent on taxing America and
statesmen were found to undertake the experiment. England therefore set
out upon a new course. She imposed taxes upon the colonists, regulated
grievances. Some of the more restless spirits rioted in the streets,
sacked the houses of the king's officers, and tore up the stamped paper.
over to keep order. More irritating laws were passed by Parliament.
Rioting again appeared: tea was dumped in the harbor of Boston and
The response of the colonists was a Continental Congress for defense. An
spring of 1775 brought forth from the king of England a proclamation:
"The Americans are rebels!"
The die was cast. The American Revolution had begun. Washington was made
commander-in-chief. Armies were raised, money was borrowed, a huge
volume of paper currency was issued, and foreign aid was summoned.
Franklin plied his diplomatic arts at Paris until in 1778 he induced
Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown. In 1783, by the formal treaty of
peace, George III acknowledged the independence of the United States.
sovereign powers of the earth.
from the former dominions. All power was declared to be in the people.
All the colonies became states, each with its own constitution or plan
of government. The thirteen states were united in common bonds under the
world had never seen. Could it succeed or was it destined to break down
the answer.
=References=
J. Fiske, _The American Revolution_ (2 vols.).
H. Lodge, _Life of Washington_ (2 vols.).
W. Sumner, _The Financier and the Finances of the American Revolution_.
by an English historian.
C.H. Van Tyne, _The American Revolution_ (American Nation Series) and
_The Loyalists in the American Revolution_.
=Questions=
1. What was the non-importation agreement? By what body was it adopted?
2. Contrast the work of the first and second Continental Congresses.
4. Trace the growth of American independence from opinion to the sphere
of action.
5. Why is the Declaration of Independence an "immortal" document?
6. What was the effect of the Revolution on colonial governments? On
national union?
7. Describe the contest between "Patriots" and "Tories."
war was won.
in the World War (1917-18).
11. How was the Revolution financed?
12. Why is diplomacy important in war? Describe the diplomatic triumph
=Research Topics=
Declaration of the Causes and the Necessity of Taking Up Arms,
Macdonald, pp. 176-183; and (3) the Declaration of Independence.
Vol. I, pp. 147-197. Elson, _History of the United States_, pp. 250-254.
=Diplomacy and the French Alliance.=--Hart, _American History Told by
Callender, _Economic History of the United States_, pp. 159-168; Elson,
pp. 275-280.
=Biographical Studies.=--Washington, Franklin, Samuel Adams, Patrick
=The Tories.=--Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. II, pp. 470-480.
=An English View of the Revolution.=--Green, _Short History of England_,
PART III. THE UNION AND NATIONAL POLITICS
CHAPTER VII
THE PROMISE AND THE DIFFICULTIES OF AMERICA
majority of the patriots whose labors and sacrifices had made this
possible naturally looked upon their work and pronounced it good. Those
the Declaration of Independence, even if splendidly phrased, and paper
constitutions, drawn by finest enthusiasm "uninstructed by experience,"
could not alone make the republic great and prosperous or even free. All
immediate future.
=The Weakness of the Articles of Confederation.=--The government under
the Articles of Confederation had neither the strength nor the resources
necessary to cope with the problems of reconstruction left by the war.
The sole organ of government was a Congress composed of from two to
vote--Delaware thus enjoying the same weight as Virginia. There was no
president to enforce the laws. Congress was given power to select a
when it was not in session; but this device, on being tried out, proved
a failure. There was no system of national courts to which citizens and
states could appeal for the protection of their rights or through which
they could compel obedience to law. The two great powers of government,
authorize expenditures but had to rely upon the states for the payment
of contributions to meet its bills. It could also order the
establishment of an army, but it could only request the states to supply
their respective quotas of soldiers. It could not lay taxes nor bring
any pressure to bear upon a single citizen in the whole country. It
=Financial and Commercial Disorders.=--In the field of public finance,
the disorders were pronounced. The huge debt incurred during the war was
still outstanding. Congress was unable to pay either the interest or the
their bonds sank to twenty-five or even ten cents on the dollar. The
current bills of Congress were unpaid. As some one complained, there was
the transactions of the shadow legislature. The currency was in utter
chaos. Millions of dollars in notes issued by Congress had become mere
trash worth a cent or two on the dollar. There was no other expression
of contempt so forceful as the popular saying: "not worth a
circulation consisted of English, French, and Spanish coins, and the
public was even defrauded by them because money changers were busy
clipping and filing away the metal. Foreign commerce was unsettled. The
entire British system of trade discrimination was turned against the
was unable to retaliate or to negotiate treaties which it could enforce.
Domestic commerce was impeded by the jealousies of the states, which
currency made the exchange of money and goods extremely difficult, and,
as if to increase the confusion, backward states enacted laws hindering
the prompt collection of debts within their borders--an evil which
=Congress in Disrepute.=--With treaties set at naught by the states, the
laws unenforced, the treasury empty, and the public credit gone, the
treated with contempt. Even its own members looked upon it as a solemn
futility. Some of the ablest men refused to accept election to it, and
Again and again it was impossible to secure a quorum for the transaction
=Troubles of the State Governments.=--The state governments, free to
population. Oppressed by their financial burdens and discouraged by the
several states joined in a concerted effort and compelled their
legislatures to issue large sums of paper money. The currency fell in
old accounts.
Laws were made one year only to be repealed the next and reenacted the
canceled by its successor. Uncertainty and distrust were the natural
consequences. Men of substance longed for some power that would forbid
payment of debts, or to impair the obligation of contracts. Men heavily
in debt, on the other hand, urged even more drastic action against
creditors.
1786 that a mob surrounded the legislature, demanding a repeal of the
taxes and the issuance of paper money. It was with difficulty that an
armed rebellion was avoided. In Massachusetts the malcontents, under the
leadership of Daniel Shays, a captain in the Revolutionary army,
organized that same year open resistance to the government of the state.
Shays and his followers protested against the conduct of creditors in
foreclosing mortgages upon the debt-burdened farmers, against the
lawyers for increasing the costs of legal proceedings, against the
senate of the state the members of which were apportioned among the
against the refusal of the legislature to issue paper money. They seized
the towns of Worcester and Springfield and broke up the courts of
sending a shock of alarm to every center and section of the young
quell the uprising; and when that task was accomplished, the state
government did not dare to execute any of the prisoners because they had
so many sympathizers. Moreover, Bowdoin and several members of the
legislature who had been most zealous in their attacks on the insurgents
emphasized by men who were opposed to revolutionary acts.
=Alarm over Dangers to the Republic.=--Leading American citizens,
watching the drift of affairs, were slowly driven to the conclusion that
the new ship of state so proudly launched a few years before was
a friend of Washington, "do not at present wear so promising an
appearance as I had fondly painted in my mind. The prejudices,
jealousies, and turbulence of the people at times almost stagger my
confidence in our political establishments; and almost occasion me to
think that they will show themselves unworthy of the noble prize for
which we have contended."
Washington himself was profoundly discouraged. On hearing of Shays's
be such inconsistency and perfidiousness in his conduct! It is but the
other day that we were shedding our blood to obtain the constitutions
under which we now live--constitutions of our own choice and making--and
now we are unsheathing our sword to overturn them." The same year he
burst out in a lament over rumors of restoring royal government. "I am
without horror. From thinking proceeds speaking. Hence to acting is
often but a single step. But how irresistible and tremendous! What a
triumph for our enemies to verify their predictions! What a triumph for
ourselves!"
the events that disturbed Washington. On the contrary it put forth many
efforts to check tendencies so dangerous to finance, commerce,
industries, and the Confederation itself. In 1781, even before the
treaty of peace was signed, the Congress, having found out how futile
imports. Yet this mild measure was rejected by the states. Two years
later the Congress prepared another amendment sanctioning the levy of
applied to the payment of the public debt. This more limited proposal,
made a third appeal to the states for help, declaring that they had been
so irregular and so negligent in paying their quotas that further
reliance upon that mode of raising revenues was dishonorable and
dangerous.
THE CALLING OF A CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
body, a convention to frame a new plan of government. In 1780, the
youthful Alexander Hamilton, realizing the weakness of the Articles, so
unless there was lodged somewhere a supreme power "to regulate and
govern the general concerns of the confederated republic." The governor
suggested to the state legislature in 1785 the advisability of a
legislature approved the plan, but did not press it to a conclusion.
[Illustration: ALEXANDER HAMILTON]
Virginia legislature, taking things into its own hands, called a
commerce. When the convention assembled in 1786, it was found that only
were deeply discouraged, but the resourceful Hamilton, a delegate from
convention, to meet at Philadelphia.
=A National Convention Called (1787).=--The Congress, as tardy as ever,
changes, however, it restricted the convention to "the sole and express
powers, it added that any alterations proposed should be referred to the
Congress and the states for their approval.
had already anticipated the Congress by selecting delegates before the
formal summons came. Thus, by the persistence of governors,
long-desired national convention. In May, 1787, it assembled in
=The Eminent Men of the Convention.=--On the roll of that memorable
convention were fifty-five men, at least half of whom were acknowledged
to be among the foremost statesmen and thinkers in America. Every field
of statecraft was represented by them: war and practical management in
Washington, who was chosen president of the convention; diplomacy in
Franklin, now old and full of honor in his own land as well as abroad;
finance in Alexander Hamilton and Robert Morris; law in James Wilson of
"father of the Constitution." They were not theorists but practical men,
Declaration of Independence: Read of Delaware, Sherman of Connecticut,
Wythe of Virginia, Gerry of Massachusetts, Franklin, Robert Morris,
the delegates had gained political experience as governors of states.
"The convention as a whole," according to the historian Hildreth,
THE FRAMING OF THE CONSTITUTION
in number: (1) Shall the Articles of Confederation be revised or a new
foundation of population? (3) What direct share shall the people have in
the election of national officers? (4) What shall be the qualifications
for the suffrage? (5) How shall the conflicting interests of the
commercial and the planting states be balanced so as to safeguard the
such as the issuance of paper money? (9) Shall the approval of all the
=Revision of the Articles or a New Government?=--The moment the first
problem was raised, representatives of the small states, led by William
Paterson of New Jersey, were on their feet. They feared that, if the
put in jeopardy. Their protest was therefore vigorous. They cited the
call issued by the Congress in summoning the convention which
purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation." They cited also
revolution in it. To depart from the authorization laid down by the
argued, and to betray the trust reposed in them by their countrymen.
To their contentions, Randolph of Virginia replied: "When the salvation
of the republic is at stake, it would be treason to our trust not to
their work was still subject to the approval of the states, frankly said
clear, the convention cast aside the Articles as if they did not exist
foundations on such principles and organizing its powers in such form"
Compromise.=--Defeated in their attempt to limit the convention to a
mere revision of the Articles, the spokesmen of the smaller states
redoubled their efforts to preserve the equality of the states. The
signal for a radical departure from the Articles on this point was given
proposed that the new national legislature consist of two houses, the
members of which were to be apportioned among the states according to
avowed that neither he nor his state would ever bow to such tyranny. As
wealth or people--a legislature in which all states, large or small,
populous states, took up the gauntlet which Paterson had thrown down. It
boldly.... I will be equally candid.... I will never confederate on his
sessions.
Greek had met Greek. The convention was hopelessly deadlocked and on the
compromise. Instead of a Congress of one house as provided by the
agreed that the members of that chamber were to be apportioned among the
=The Question of Popular Election.=--The method of selecting federal
officers and members of Congress also produced an acrimonious debate
which revealed how deep-seated was the distrust of the capacity of the
people to govern themselves. Few there were who believed that no branch
of the government should be elected directly by the voters; still fewer
two even expressed a desire for a monarchy. The dangers of democracy
the dupes of pretended patriots.... I have been too republican
heretofore but have been taught by experience the danger of a leveling
spirit." To the "democratic licentiousness of the state legislatures,"
Randolph sought to oppose a "firm senate." To check the excesses of
judges. Other members of the convention were stoutly opposed to such
Pennsylvania, vigorously championed popular election; while men like
Madison insisted that at least one part of the government should rest on
the broad foundation of the people.
Out of this clash of opinion also came compromise. One branch, the House
of Representatives, it was agreed, was to be elected directly by the
legislatures of the states might determine, and the judges of the
had made so much trouble with radical laws, were elected by freeholders.
should be elected by voters having the "qualifications requisite for
electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislature." Thus
they accepted the suffrage provisions of the states.
the real division in the convention was not between the large and the
small states but between the planting section founded on slave labor and
the commercial North. Thus he anticipated by nearly three-quarters of a
the free white population nor the wealth of the North. There were,
and other staples abroad, they feared that Congress might impose
restraints upon their enterprise. Being weaker in numbers, they were
were therefore very anxious to secure for their section the largest
the taxing power of that body. Two devices were thought adapted to these
ends. One was to count the slaves as people when apportioning
apportioned among the states, in proportion not to their wealth but to
the number of their free white inhabitants. For obvious reasons the
Northern delegates objected to these proposals. Once more a compromise
and direct taxation.
_Commerce and the Slave Trade._--Southern interests were also involved
in the project to confer upon Congress the power to regulate interstate
would enable Congress to protect American manufactures and to break
down, by appropriate retaliations, foreign discriminations against
American commerce. To the South the proposal was menacing because
tariffs might interfere with the free exchange of the produce of
subject, denouncing slavery as a nefarious institution and the curse of
by slaves. They prevent the migration of whites who really strengthen
and enrich a country."
and that the high death rate in the rice swamps made continuous
importation necessary. Ellsworth of Connecticut took the ground that
the convention should not meddle with slavery. "The morality or wisdom
enriches a part enriches the whole." To the future he turned an
slaves, favored prohibiting the traffic in them; but South Carolina was
federate.
majority vote, the importation of slaves should not be forbidden before
the lapse of twenty years, and that any import tax should not exceed $10
trade, it was stipulated that a two-thirds vote in the Senate should be
provision also useful in the North, where indentured servants were about
as troublesome as slaves in escaping from their masters.
=The Form of the Government.=--As to the details of the frame of
government and the grand principles involved, the opinion of the
convention ebbed and flowed, decisions being taken in the heat of
debate, only to be revoked and taken again.
executive branch; for reliance upon Congress to enforce its own laws and
treaties had been a broken reed. On the character and functions of the
executive, however, there were many views. The New Jersey plan called
whether it should be composed of one or several persons. On this matter
on a single executive chosen indirectly by electors selected as the
state legislatures might decide, serving for four years, subject to
impeachment, and endowed with regal powers in the command of the army
and the navy and in the enforcement of the laws.
_The Legislative Branch--Congress._--After the convention had made the
representation to states in the Senate and to population in the House,
the question of methods of election had to be decided. As to the House
elected by direct popular vote. There was also easy agreement on the
proposition that a strong Senate was needed to check the "turbulence" of
the lower house. Four devices were finally selected to accomplish this
purpose. In the first place, the Senators were not to be chosen directly
election one degree from the populace. In the second place, their term
was fixed at six years instead of two, as in the case of the House. In
one-third of the members go out at a time while two-thirds remained in
_The Judiciary._--The need for federal courts to carry out the law was
was, in a large measure, attributed to the want of a judiciary to hold
the national capital and emancipated from local interests and
traditions; they remembered with what insistence they had claimed
against Britain the right of local trial by jury and with what
consternation they had viewed the proposal to make colonial judges
independent of the assemblies in the matter of their salaries.
Reluctantly they yielded to the demand for federal courts, consenting at
first only to a supreme court to review cases heard in lower state
_The System of Checks and Balances._--It is thus apparent that the
for a distribution of power among three branches, executive,
legislative, and judicial. Strictly speaking we might say four branches,
different ways, and one of them, the Senate, was made a check on the
President through its power of ratifying treaties and appointments. "The
same hands," wrote Madison, "whether of one, a few, or many, and whether
prevent such a centralization of authority were exceedingly ingenious
and well calculated to accomplish the purposes of the authors.
The legislature consisted of two houses, the members of which were to be
apportioned on a different basis, elected in different ways, and to
President elected in a manner not employed in the choice of either
run the gantlet of both houses and the executive, it was subject to
interpretation and annulment by the judiciary, appointed by the
President with the consent of the Senate and serving for life. Thus it
was made almost impossible for any political party to get possession of
all branches of the government at a single popular election. As Hamilton
remarked, the friends of good government considered "every institution
likely to do good than harm."
serious dispute. Even the delegates from the small states agreed with
should be added to those intrusted to Congress by the Articles of
Confederation. The New Jersey plan as well as the Virginia plan
recognized this fact. Some of the delegates, like Hamilton and Madison,
all national matters; but others, frightened by the specter of
_Taxation and Commerce._--There were none bold enough to dissent from
the proposition that revenue must be provided to pay current expenses
and discharge the public debt. When once the dispute over the
apportionment of direct taxes among the slave states was settled, it was
an easy matter to decide that Congress should have power to lay and
government was freed from dependence upon stubborn and tardy
legislatures and enabled to collect funds directly from citizens. There
were likewise none bold enough to contend that the anarchy of state
tariffs and trade discriminations should be longer endured. When the
was completely discredited. As in the case of taxes a direct authority
over citizens was demanded. Congress was therefore given full power to
when desirable; but it could at the same time maintain a regular army
was thought to require it.
Congress by the Constitution, the advocates of a strong national
government added a general clause authorizing it to make all laws
Justice Marshall, was later construed to confer powers as wide as the
requirements of a vast country spanning a continent and taking its place
large powers were by no means the sole concern of the convention. Its
very existence had been due quite as much to the conduct of the state
legislatures as to the futilities of a paralyzed Continental Congress.
course. Viewing with extreme tenderness the case of the debtor, their
efforts were unceasingly directed to his relief. To exact a faithful
compliance with contracts was, in their opinion, a harsh measure which
money laws enabling debtors to discharge their obligations more easily.
The convention put an end to such practices by providing that no state
should emit bills of credit or make anything but gold or silver legal
tender in the payment of debts. The state legislatures had enacted laws
allowing men to pay their debts by turning over to creditors land or
personal property; they had repealed the charter of an endowed college
and taken the management from the hands of the lawful trustees; and they
had otherwise interfered with the enforcement of private agreements. The
convention, taking notice of such matters, inserted a clause forbidding
states "to impair the obligation of contracts." The more venturous of
the authorities of the state. The convention answered by a brief
equipped with a regular army, would send troops to suppress domestic
insurrections whenever called upon by the legislature or, if it was not
Constitution, laws, and treaties were made the supreme law of the land,
against violations on the part of any state authorities.
government had been determined, the powers to be vested in it had been
Constitution be ratified? What number of states shall be necessary to
put it into effect? How shall it be amended in the future?
seemed positive. The Articles of Confederation were still in effect.
They provided that amendments could be made only by unanimous adoption
in Congress and the approval of all the states. As if to give force to
this provision of law, the call for the convention had expressly stated
that all alterations and revisions should be reported to Congress for
purposes of the delegates, because Congress and the state legislatures
were openly hostile to such drastic changes as had been made. Unanimous
ratification, as events proved, would have been impossible. Therefore
with the recommendation that it, in turn, transmit the document, not to
the state legislatures, but to conventions held in the states for the
It was their belief that special conventions would be more friendly than
The convention was equally positive in dealing with the problem of the
to change the Articles had failed because amendment required the
approval of every state and there was always at least one recalcitrant
member of the union. The opposition to a new Constitution was
undoubtedly formidable. Rhode Island had even refused to take part in
framing it, and her hostility was deep and open. So the convention cast
aside the provision of the Articles of Confederation which required
unanimous approval for any change in the plan of government; it decreed
that the new Constitution should go into effect when ratified by nine
decided that an amendment could be made on a two-thirds vote in both
houses of Congress and ratification by three-fourths of the states. This
the future by amendments duly adopted even in case it did not approve
them itself. America in this way set out upon the high road that led
from a league of states to a nation.
THE STRUGGLE OVER RATIFICATION
On September 17, 1787, the Constitution, having been finally drafted in
adopted. The convention, after nearly four months of debate in secret
finished plan for the new government. Then the great debate passed to
the people.
to sign it. "A monster" out of the "thick veil of secrecy," declaimed a
Pennsylvania newspaper. "An iron-handed despotism will be the result,"
"will now admit the 'six hundred well-born' immediately to establish
this most noble, most excellent, and truly divine constitution." The
President will become a king; Congress will be as tyrannical as
of the people will be trampled upon; the poor man's justice will be lost
in the endless delays of the federal courts--such was the strain of the
[Illustration: AN ADVERTISEMENT OF _The Federalist_]
and provision of the proposed plan. These papers, afterwards collected
and published in a volume known as _The Federalist_, form the finest
textbook on the Constitution that has ever been printed. It takes its
place, moreover, among the wisest and weightiest treatises on government
ever written in any language in any time. Other men, not so gifted, were
no less earnest in their support of ratification. In private
they urged their countrymen to forget their partisanship and accept a
Constitution which, in spite of any defects great or small, was the
only guarantee against dissolution and warfare at home and dishonor and
=The Action of the State Conventions.=--Before the end of the year,
Jersey unanimously and Pennsylvania after a short, though savage,
the narrow margin of 187 votes to 168. In the spring came the news that
Maryland and South Carolina were "under the new roof." On June 21, New
Hampshire, where the sentiment was at first strong enough to defeat the
decision in Massachusetts. Swift couriers were sent to carry the news to
given her approval by a narrow margin, leaving New York as the next seat
of anxiety. In that state the popular vote for the delegates to the
finally demonstrated the futility of resistance, and Hamilton by good
judgment and masterly arguments was at last able to marshal a majority
of thirty to twenty-seven votes in favor of ratification.
journalist, "when last heard from was ashore on Union rocks."
=The First Election.=--In the autumn of 1788, elections were held to
fill the places in the new government. Public opinion was overwhelmingly
in favor of Washington as the first President. Yielding to the
importunities of friends, he accepted the post in the spirit of public
in New York City. "Long live George Washington, President of the United
States!" cried Chancellor Livingston as soon as the General had kissed
the Bible. The cry was caught by the assembled multitude and given back.
M. Farrand, _The Framing of the Constitution of the United States_.
P.L. Ford, _Essays on the Constitution of the United States_.
_The Federalist_ (in many editions).
A.C. McLaughlin, _The Confederation and the Constitution_ (American
Nation Series).
=Questions=
1. Account for the failure of the Articles of Confederation.
4. Narrate the events leading up to the constitutional convention.
their previous training?
8. Show how the "check and balance" system is embodied in our form of
government.
9. How did the powers conferred upon the federal government help cure
the defects of the Articles of Confederation?
10. In what way did the provisions for ratifying and amending the
11. What was the nature of the conflict over ratification?
of the United States_, pp. 210-220.
=Financial Condition of the United States.=--Fiske, _Critical Period of
American History_, pp. 163-186.
=Selfish Conduct of the States.=--Callender, pp. 185-191.
=The Failure of the Confederation.=--Elson, _History of the United
=Formation of the Constitution.=--(1) The plans before the convention,
Fiske, pp. 236-249; (2) the great compromise, Fiske, pp. 250-255; (3)
slavery and the convention, Fiske, pp. 256-266; and (4) the frame of
government, Fiske, pp. 275-301; Elson, pp. 328-334.
=Biographical Studies.=--Look up the history and services of the leaders
=Ratification of the Constitution.=--Hart, _History Told by
Contemporaries_, Vol. III, pp. 233-254; Elson, pp. 334-340.
=Source Study.=--Compare the Constitution and Articles of Confederation
Congress; (3) limits on states; and (4) methods of amendment. Every line
CHAPTER VIII
THE CLASH OF POLITICAL PARTIES
THE MEN AND MEASURES OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT
assembled after the adoption of the Constitution, there were eleven
Senators, led by Robert Morris, the financier, who had been delegates to
in 1787. In making his appointments, Washington strengthened the new
system of government still further by a judicious selection of
officials. He chose as Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton,
who had been the most zealous for its success; General Knox, head of the
War Department, and Edmund Randolph, the Attorney-General, were likewise
judiciary whom Washington appointed, from the Chief Justice, John Jay,
down to the justices of the district courts, had favored the
ratification of the Constitution; and a majority of them had served as
members of the national convention that framed the document or of the
state ratifying conventions. Only one man of influence in the new
government, Thomas Jefferson, the Secretary of State, was reckoned as a
doubter in the house of the faithful. He had expressed opinions both for
=An Opposition to Conciliate.=--The inauguration of Washington amid the
plaudits of his countrymen did not set at rest all the political turmoil
which had been aroused by the angry contest over ratification. "The
of the parties, the animation produced inevitably by ardent debate had a
government in opposition to which all their passions were enlisted." The
been approved in the great states of Massachusetts, Virginia, and New
of amendments for immediate submission to the states.
Madison proposed, and the first Congress adopted, a series of amendments
part of the law of the land. These amendments provided, among other
religion, abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or the right
trial by jury for all persons charged by federal officers with serious
crimes. To reassure those who still feared that local rights might be
provided that the powers not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the
amendment was written in the same spirit as the first ten, after a
heated debate over the action of the Supreme Court in permitting a
a citizen.
=Funding the National Debt.=--Paper declarations of rights, however,
paid no bills. To this task Hamilton turned all his splendid genius. At
the very outset he addressed himself to the problem of the huge public
Public Credit_ under date of January 9, 1790, one of the first and
of his plan. He proposed that the federal government should call in all
the old bonds, certificates of indebtedness, and other promises to pay
which had been issued by the Congress since the beginning of the
Revolution. These national obligations, he urged, should be put into one
holders of the old paper should be issued new bonds drawing interest at
fixed rates. This process was called "funding the debt." Such a
satisfy creditors, restore landed property to its former value, and
furnish new resources to agriculture and commerce in the form of credit
=Assumption and Funding of State Debts.=--Hamilton then turned to the
These debts he proposed to add to the national debt. They were to be
"assumed" by the United States government and placed on the same secure
on grounds of national honor. It would, as he foresaw, give strength to
the new national government by making all public creditors, men of
substance in their several communities, look to the federal, rather than
=Funding at Face Value.=--On the question of the terms of consolidation,
assumption, and funding, Hamilton had a firm conviction. That millions
of dollars' worth of the continental and state bonds had passed out of
the hands of those who had originally subscribed their funds to the
support of the government or had sold supplies for the Revolutionary
army was well known. It was also a matter of common knowledge that a
had been suggested, even in very respectable quarters, that a
the government should "scale the debt" by redeeming, not at full value
but at a figure reasonably above the market price. Against the
government was honestly bound to redeem every bond at its face value,
although the difficulty of securing revenue made necessary a lower rate
securing the approval of both houses of Congress for the funding of the
without any warrant in the Constitution and devised in the interest of
Northern speculators who, anticipating assumption and funding, had
bought up at low prices the Southern bonds and other promises to pay.
New England, on the other hand, was strongly in favor of assumption;
several representatives from that section were rash enough to threaten a
dissolution of the union if the bill was defeated. To this dispute was
added an equally bitter quarrel over the location of the national
[Illustration: FIRST UNITED STATES BANK AT PHILADELPHIA]
threatened the very existence of the young government. Washington and
contest had been carried and acting on the appeal from the Secretary of
the Treasury, Jefferson intervened at this point. By skillful management
at a good dinner he brought the opposing leaders together; and thus once
more, as on many other occasions, peace was purchased and the union
votes for assumption in return for votes for the capital. Enough
was mustered in favor of building the capital on the banks of the
Potomac, after locating it for a ten-year period at Philadelphia to
satisfy Pennsylvania members.
assumption measures, Hamilton laid before Congress a project for a great
United States Bank. He proposed that a private corporation be chartered
by Congress, authorized to raise a capital stock of $10,000,000
(three-fourths in new six per cent federal bonds and one-fourth in
specie) and empowered to issue paper currency under proper safeguards.
Many advantages, Hamilton contended, would accrue to the government from
this institution. The price of the government bonds would be increased,
thus enhancing public credit. A national currency would be created of
bank in various cities would make easy the exchange of funds so vital to
commercial transactions on a national scale. Finally, through the issue
of bank notes, the money capital available for agriculture and industry
hotly attacked the bank on the ground that Congress had no power
Hamilton defended it with great cogency. Washington, after weighing all
opinions, decided in favor of the proposal. In 1791 the bill
became a law.
protection of American industries. The first revenue act of 1789, though
designed primarily to bring money into the empty treasury, declared in
favor of the principle. The following year Washington referred to the
delay of more than a year, was his _Report on Manufactures_, another
state paper worthy, in closeness of reasoning and keenness of
based his argument on the broadest national grounds: the protective
market for the produce of farms and plantations; by making the United
States independent of other countries in times of peace, it would double
children, it would turn to the production of goods persons otherwise
idle or only partly employed; by increasing the trade between the North
ties those of commerce and intercourse. The revenue measure of 1792 bore
THE RISE OF POLITICAL PARTIES
=Dissensions over Hamilton's Measures.=--Hamilton's plans, touching
debts was a deep design to undermine the state governments; Congress had
no constitutional power to create a bank; the law creating the bank
merely allowed a private corporation to make paper money and lend it at
the benefit of manufacturers.
Hamilton's reply to this bill of indictment was simple and
Constitution was not to be interpreted narrowly but in the full light of
needed to start up American industries, giving markets to farmers and
planters. The tariff by creating a home market and increasing
such wise policies firmly pursued by the government, he concluded, were
bound to come strength and prosperity for the new government at home,
credit and power abroad. This view Washington fully indorsed, adding
=The Sharpness of the Partisan Conflict.=--As a result of the clash of
Federalists and Anti-Federalists, the former led by Hamilton, the latter
manufacturing, financial, and commercial groups of the population who
were eager to extend their business operations. The strength of the
interests. The farming and planting South, outside of the few towns,
and the tariff. The conflict between the parties grew steadily in
bitterness, despite the conciliatory and engaging manner in which
Hamilton presented his cause in his state papers and despite the
constant efforts of Washington to soften the asperity of the
contestants.
gone far before the opponents of the administration began to look to
Jefferson as their leader. Some of Hamilton's measures he had approved,
than once, he and Hamilton, shaking violently with anger, attacked each
other at cabinet meetings, and nothing short of the grave and dignified
1794 it finally came. Jefferson resigned as Secretary of State and
retired to his home in Virginia to assume, through correspondence and
negotiation, the leadership of the steadily growing party of opposition.
Shy and modest in manner, halting in speech, disliking the turmoil of
Jefferson was not very well fitted for the strenuous life of political
contest. Nevertheless, he was an ambitious and shrewd negotiator. He was
Hamilton. The latter believed in a strong, active, "high-toned"
upon such government as dangerous to the liberties of citizens and
openly avowed his faith in the desirability of occasional popular
the people with an abandon that was considered reckless in his time.
On economic matters, the opinions of the two leaders were also
hopelessly at variance. Hamilton, while cherishing agriculture, desired
artisans are usually the dangerous element that make revolutions;
insidious morals and manners. The only substantial foundation for a
hands for their sustenance. Trusting as he did in the innate goodness of
human nature when nourished on a free soil, Jefferson advocated those
persons rather than the powers of government. Thus he became the
champion of the individual against the interference of the government,
freedom of scientific inquiry. It was, accordingly, no mere factious
spirit that drove him into opposition to Hamilton.
was accompanied by an armed revolt against the government in 1794. The
occasion for this uprising was another of Hamilton's measures, a law
laying an excise tax on distilled spirits, for the purpose of increasing
own stills. The new revenue law meant that federal officers would now
come into the homes of the people, measure their liquor, and take the
the fiscal measures of the government was redoubled. In the western
pay the tax. In Pennsylvania, some of them sacked and burned the houses
a fair way to nullify the law in whole districts when Washington called
collapsed; but it left behind a deep-seated resentment which flared up
disaffected regions.
=The French Revolution.=--In this exciting period, when all America was
distracted by partisan disputes, a storm broke in Europe--the
a few days after Washington was inaugurated. The king of France, Louis
XVI, driven into bankruptcy by extravagance and costly wars, was forced
to resort to his people for financial help. Accordingly he called, for
the first time in more than one hundred fifty years, a meeting of the
assembly. This stirred the country to its depths.
assembly amid great excitement. A few days later came the famous
Declaration of the Rights of Man, proclaiming the sovereignty of the
people and the privileges of citizens. In the autumn of 1791, Louis XVI
legislative power in a popular assembly. Little disorder accompanied
government of his country on the consent of the governed.
=American Influence in France.=--In undertaking their great political
revolt the French had been encouraged by the outcome of the American
Revolution. Officers and soldiers, who had served in the American war,
reported to their French countrymen marvelous tales. At the frugal table
of General Washington, in council with the unpretentious Franklin, or at
learned to respect both the talents and the simple character of the
carried home to the king and ruling class stories of an astounding
"which these youths acquired in America and propagated in France with so
much enthusiasm and such deplorable success--for this mania of imitation
powerfully aided the Revolution, though it was not the sole cause of
it--we are bound to confess that it would have been better, both for
step in the first stages of the French Revolution greeted with applause
in the United States. "Liberty will have another feather in her cap,"
exultantly wrote a Boston editor. "In no part of the globe," soberly
wrote John Marshall, "was this revolution hailed with more joy than in
sent to Washington as a memento, was accepted as "a token of the
Federalists and Anti-Federalists regarded the new constitution of France
as another vindication of American ideals.
=The Reign of Terror.=--While profuse congratulations were being
exchanged, rumors began to come that all was not well in France. Many
government. Louis XVI entered into negotiations with his brother
and he finally betrayed to the French people his true sentiments by
attempting to escape from his kingdom, only to be captured and taken
back to Paris in disgrace.
A new phase of the revolution now opened. The working people, excluded
a great open field, they signed a petition calling for another
constitution giving them the suffrage. When told to disperse, they
refused and were fired upon by the national guard. This "massacre," as
which it held its sessions. In a little while it became the master of
immediately abolished and a republic established. On January 21, 1793,
Louis was sent to the scaffold. To the war on Austria, already raging,
radicals in possession of the convention executed in large numbers
counter-revolutionists and those suspected of sympathy with the
monarchy. They shot down peasants who rose in insurrection against their
Terrible atrocities were committed on both sides in the name of liberty,
seemed that the Revolution, so auspiciously begun, had degenerated into
anarchy and mere bloodthirsty strife.
spread to all Europe. In his _Reflections on the French Revolution_,
popular government; he called for war, relentless war, upon the French
as monsters and outlaws; he demanded that they be reduced to order by
the restoration of the king to full power under the protection of the
arms of European nations.
=Paine's Defense of the French Revolution.=--To counteract the campaign
of hate against the French, Thomas Paine replied to Burke in another of
his famous tracts, _The Rights of Man_, which was given to the American
monarchy and aristocracy but had forgotten the starving peasants and the
bird. Burke had denied the right of the French people to choose their
societies. Paine answered: "If I ask a man in America if he wants a
that the doctrines of the rights of man were "new fangled," Paine
replied that the question was not whether they were new or old but
whether they were right or wrong. As to the French disorders and
difficulties, he bade the world wait to see what would be brought forth
=The Effect of the French Revolution on American Politics.=--The course
of the French Revolution and the controversies accompanying it,
exercised a profound influence on the formation of the first political
parties in America. The followers of Hamilton, now proud of the name
"Federalists," drew back in fright as they heard of the cruel deeds
committed during the Reign of Terror. They turned savagely upon the
revolutionists and their friends in America, denouncing as "Jacobin"
French Republic. A Massachusetts preacher roundly assailed "the
atheistical, anarchical, and in other respects immoral principles of the
Jefferson and the Anti-Federalists, whom he charged with spreading false
French propaganda and betraying America. "The editors, patrons, and
considered and treated as enemies to their country.... Of all traitors
they are the most aggravatedly criminal; of all villains, they are the
most infamous and detestable."
it. Paine's pamphlet, indorsed by Jefferson, was widely read. Democratic
societies, after the fashion of French political clubs, arose in the
cities; the coalition of European monarchs against France was denounced
as a coalition against the very principles of republicanism; and the
Philadelphia. Harmless titles, such as "Sir," "the Honorable," and "His
insisted on adopting the French title, "Citizen," speaking, for example,
of "Citizen Judge" and "Citizen Toastmaster." Pamphlets in defense of
the French streamed from the press, while subsidized newspapers kept the
propaganda in full swing.
without producing any serious results, had it not been for the war
between England and France, then raging. The English, having command of
the seas, claimed the right to seize American produce bound for French
ports and to confiscate American ships engaged in carrying French goods.
Adding fuel to a fire already hot enough, they began to search American
ships and to carry off British-born sailors found on board American
vessels.
turned to the United States for aid in its war on England and sent over
the new order. On his arrival at Charleston, he was greeted with fervor
by the Anti-Federalists. As he made his way North, he was wined and
whole country was ready to join the French Republic in its contest with
England. Genet therefore attempted to use the American ports as the base
and he insisted that the United States was in honor bound to help France
=The Proclamation of Neutrality and the Jay Treaty.=--Unmoved by the
rising tide of popular sympathy for France, Washington took a firm
France under the old treaty of alliance he answered by proclaiming the
neutrality of America and warning American citizens against hostile acts
toward either France or England. When Genet continued to hold meetings,
issue manifestoes, and stir up the people against England, Washington
sending the Chief Justice, John Jay, on a pacific mission to England.
The result was the celebrated Jay treaty of 1794. By its terms Great
trade concessions. The chief sources of bitterness--the failure of the
British to return slaves carried off during the Revolution, the seizure
of American ships, and the impressment of sailors--were not touched,
Federalists. Nevertheless, Washington, dreading an armed conflict with
England, urged the Senate to ratify the treaty. The weight of his
influence carried the day.
than an alliance between England and the Anglo-men of this country,
against the legislature and the people of the United States." Hamilton,
defending it with his usual courage, was stoned by a mob in New York and
driven from the platform with blood streaming from his face. Jay was
burned in effigy. Even Washington was not spared. The House of
Representatives was openly hostile. To display its feelings, it called
only to be more highly incensed by his flat refusal to present them, on
his second term in office. He did not believe that a third term was
unconstitutional or improper; but, worn out by his long and arduous
labors in war and in peace and wounded by harsh attacks from former
friends, he longed for the quiet of his beautiful estate at Mount
Vernon.
the attention of the people to three subjects of lasting interest. He
warned them against sectional jealousies. He remonstrated against the
essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it would be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics or the ordinary combinations and collisions
care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary
alliances for extraordinary emergencies."
=The Campaign of 1796--Adams Elected.=--On hearing of the retirement of
Washington, the Anti-Federalists cast off all restraints. In honor of
monarchical tendencies of the Federalists, they boldly assumed the name
"Republican"; the term "Democrat," then applied only to obscure and
despised radicals, had not come into general use. They selected
Jefferson as their candidate for President against John Adams, the
Federalist nominee, and carried on such a spirited campaign that they
came within four votes of electing him.
for conciliating a determined opposition. He was a reserved and studious
man. He was neither a good speaker nor a skillful negotiator. In one of
his books he had declared himself in favor of "government by an
never forgave. While John Marshall found him "a sensible, plain, candid,
popularity during his administration.
Jay treaty as a rebuke to France and a flagrant violation of obligations
receive the American minister, treated him in a humiliating way, and
finally told him to leave the country. Overlooking this affront in his
Republic. On their arrival, they were chagrined to find, instead of a
affair reached President Adams, he promptly laid it before Congress,
and Mr. Z."
This insult, coupled with the fact that French privateers, like the
British, were preying upon American commerce, enraged even the
Republicans who had been loudest in the profession of their French
the Federalists in shouting: "Millions for defense, not a cent for
tribute!" Preparations for war were made on every hand. Washington was
once more called from Mount Vernon to take his old position at the head
on without a formal declaration of war until the year 1800. By that time
the Directory had been overthrown. A treaty was readily made with
determined, if possible, to put an end to radical French influence in
America and to silence Republican opposition. They therefore passed two
drastic laws in the summer of 1798: the Alien and Sedition Acts.
country or to imprison any alien whom he regarded as "dangerous" or "had
machinations against the government."
The second of the measures, the Sedition Act, penalized not only those
but also every one who wrote, uttered, or published "any false,
United States, with intent to defame said government ... or to bring
them or either of them into contempt or disrepute." This measure was
the freedom of speech or of the press. Even many Federalists feared the
exclaiming: "Let us not establish a tyranny. Energy is a very different
thought them "useless" and "calculated to create unnecessary discontents
The Alien law was not enforced; but it gave great offense to the Irish
and French whose activities against the American government's policy
newspapers soon found themselves in jail or broken by ruinous fines for
Bystanders at political meetings, who uttered sentiments which, though
ungenerous and severe, seem harmless enough now, were hurried before
Federalist judges and promptly fined and imprisoned. Although the
prosecutions were not numerous, they aroused a keen resentment. The
Republicans were convinced that their political opponents, having
exactly the opposite effect from that which their authors intended.
the Sedition law null and void, as violating the federal Constitution.
His resolutions were passed by the Kentucky legislature late in 1798,
Northern states, Kentucky the following year reaffirmed its position and
declared that the nullification of all unconstitutional acts of Congress
was the rightful remedy to be used by the states in the redress of
grievances. It thus defied the federal government and announced a
doctrine hostile to nationality and fraught with terrible meaning for
the future. In the neighboring state of Virginia, Madison led a movement
resolutions condemning the acts as unconstitutional and calling upon the
other states to take proper means to preserve their rights and the
rights of the people.
=The Republican Triumph in 1800.=--Thus the way was prepared for the
election of 1800. The Republicans left no stone unturned in their
efforts to place on the Federalist candidate, President Adams, all the
approving Hamilton's measures and policies. The Federalists, divided in
councils and cold in their affection for Adams, made a poor campaign.
Republicans had carried the entire South and New York also and secured
newspaper. "Sons of faction, demagogues and high priests of anarchy, now
Jefferson's election, however, was still uncertain. By a curious
the one receiving the highest number of votes to be President and the
number of votes as Jefferson; as neither had a majority the election was
thrown into the House of Representatives, where the Federalists held the
balance of power. Although it was well known that Burr was not even a
intriguing for his election to that high office. Had it not been for the
vigorous action of Hamilton the prize might have been snatched out of
Jefferson's hands. Not until the thirty-sixth ballot on February 17,
C.A. Beard, _Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy_.
H. Lodge, _Alexander Hamilton_.
=Questions=
2. What step was taken to appease the opposition?
5. Contrast the general political views of Hamilton and Jefferson.
(1789-92)?
10. Show how the war in Europe affected American commerce and involved
=Early Federal Legislation.=--Coman, _Industrial History of the United
States_, pp. 133-156; Elson, _History of the United States_, pp.
341-348.
Book_, pp. 233-243.
Europe_, Vol. I, pp. 224-282; Elson, pp. 351-354.
on the French Revolution_ and Paine's _Rights of Man_.
=The Alien and Sedition Acts.=--Macdonald, _Documentary Source Book_,
pp. 259-267; Elson, pp. 367-375.
=Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions.=--Macdonald, pp. 267-278.
Contemporaries_, Vol. III, pp. 255-343.
=The Twelfth Amendment.=--Contrast the provision in the original
FOOTNOTES:
[1] North Carolina ratified in November, 1789, and Rhode Island in May,
1790.
method of electing the President.
CHAPTER IX
THE JEFFERSONIAN REPUBLICANS IN POWER
agricultural interest, as Jefferson said, the Republicans were in the
the state, rather than the national government, as the proper center of
former went so far in the direction of local autonomy that he exalted
the state above the nation in the Kentucky resolutions of 1798,
declaring the Constitution to be a mere compact and the states competent
vengeance. "It is jealousy, not confidence, which prescribes limited
constitutions," wrote Jefferson for the Kentucky legislature. Jealousy
of the national government, not confidence in it--this is the ideal that
=Republican Simplicity.=--Every act of the Jeffersonian party during its
professed. It had opposed all pomp and ceremony, calculated to give
reading presidential addresses to Congress in joint assembly and adopted
in its stead the plan of sending his messages in writing--a custom that
=Republican Measures.=--The Republicans had complained of a great
strength to the federal government; accordingly they began to pay it off
as rapidly as possible. They had held commerce in low esteem and looked
satisfaction of the farmers. They had protested against the heavy cost
They had savagely criticized the Sedition law and Jefferson refused to
the Supreme Court, who had been especially severe in his attacks upon
offenders under the Sedition Act. Their failure to convict Justice Chase
by a narrow margin was due to no lack of zeal on their part but to the
Federalist strength in the Senate where the trial was held. They had
last hours of Adams' administration as an attempt to intrench
Federalists in the judiciary and to enlarge the sphere of the national
government. Accordingly, they at once repealed the act creating the new
judgeships, thus depriving the "midnight appointees" of their posts.
of great strength to the Federalists and Jefferson, though committed to
the principle that offices should be open to all and distributed
occurred with trusted Republicans. To his credit, however, it must be
said that he did not make wholesale removals to find room for party
The Republicans thus hewed to the line of their general policy of
restricting the weight, dignity, and activity of the national
government. Yet there were no Republicans, as the Federalists asserted,
prepared to urge serious modifications in the Constitution. "If there be
shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of
industry and improvement and shall not take from the mouth of labour the
necessary to close the circle of our felicities."
In all this the Republicans had not reckoned with destiny. In a few
the country, making inevitable a continental nation; to give the
Constitution a generous interpretation that shocked many a Federalist;
to wage war on behalf of American commerce; to reestablish the hated
United States Bank; to enact a high protective tariff; to see their
provincials; to announce high national doctrines in foreign affairs; and
=Expansion and Land Hunger.=--The first of the great measures which
drove the Republicans out upon this new national course--the purchase
of the Louisiana territory--was the product of circumstances rather than
of their deliberate choosing. It was not the lack of land for his
territory, now embracing Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin,
and a portion of Minnesota, settlements were mainly confined to the
north bank of the Ohio River. To the south, in Kentucky and Tennessee,
pushed over the mountains from Virginia and the Carolinas, there were
still wide reaches of untilled soil. The Alabama and Mississippi regions
enough to satisfy the land hunger of the American people for a century
then the center of power, saw no good reason for expansion. The planters
New York, the shipbuilders of New England, looking to the seaboard and
government, were slow to appreciate the place of the West in national
On the other hand, the pioneers of Kentucky, Ohio, and Tennessee,
unlearned in books, saw with their own eyes the resources of the
wilderness. Many of them had been across the Mississippi and had beheld
the rich lands awaiting the plow of the white man. Down the great river
they floated their wheat, corn, and bacon to ocean-going ships bound for
the ports of the seaboard or for Europe. The land journeys over the
that metropolis.
=Louisiana under Spanish Rule.=--For this reason they watched with deep
the navy necessary to resist any invasion of American trade. Moreover,
Washington had been able, by the exercise of great tact, to secure from
Spain in 1795 a trading privilege through New Orleans which satisfied
events altered the whole situation.
=Louisiana Transferred to France.=--In July, 1802, a royal order from
American produce. About the same time a disturbing rumor, long current,
France by a secret treaty signed in 1800. "The scalers of the Alps and
conquerors of Venice" now looked across the sea for new scenes of
adventure. The West was ablaze with excitement. A call for war ran
of the French; and petitions for instant action flooded in upon
Jefferson.
=Jefferson Sees the Danger.=--Jefferson, the friend of France and sworn
enemy of England, compelled to choose in the interest of America, never
winced. "The cession of Louisiana and the Floridas by Spain to France,"
he wrote to Livingston, the American minister in Paris, "works sorely on
the United States and will form a new epoch in our political course....
natural and habitual enemy. It is New Orleans through which the produce
of three-eighths of our territory must pass to market.... France,
placing herself in that door, assumes to us an attitude of defiance.
Spain might have retained it quietly for years. Her pacific
facilities there.... Not so can it ever be in the hands of France....
the union of the two nations who in conjunction can maintain exclusive
possession of the ocean. From that moment we must marry ourselves to the
British fleet and nation.... This is not a state of things we seek or
desire. It is one which this measure, if adopted by France, forces on us
as necessarily as any other cause by the laws of nature brings on its
=Louisiana Purchased.=--Acting on this belief, but apparently seeing
Before Monroe arrived, the regular minister, Livingston, had already
convinced Napoleon that it would be well to sell territory which might
as the war, temporarily stopped by the peace of Amiens, was once more
thought of buying the whole Louisiana country. He was simply dazed when
Napoleon offered to sell the entire domain and get rid of the business
accept. On April 30, they signed the treaty of cession, agreeing to pay
French citizens, making in all approximately fifteen millions. Spain
protested, Napoleon's brother fumed, French newspapers objected; but the
deed was done.
extraordinary event reached the United States, the people were filled
with astonishment, and no one was more surprised than Jefferson himself.
He had thought of buying New Orleans and West Florida for a small sum,
puzzled. On looking into the Constitution he found not a line
authorizing the purchase of more territory and so he drafted an
amendment declaring "Louisiana, as ceded by France,--a part of the
from the bargain. Thoroughly alarmed by that, Jefferson pressed the
idea that the Constitution did not warrant the purchase; but he lamely
concluded: "If our friends shall think differently, I shall certainly
country will correct the evil of construction when it shall produce ill
from his own doctrine and intrusted the construction of the Constitution
to "the good sense" of his countrymen.
=The Treaty Ratified.=--This unusual transaction, so favorable to the
West, aroused the ire of the seaboard Federalists. Some denounced it as
unconstitutional, easily forgetting Hamilton's masterly defense of the
howling wilderness" ever should be settled, it would turn against the
East, form new commercial connections, and escape from federal control.
Still others protested that the purchase would lead inevitably to the
who thought "the broad back of America" could readily bear Hamilton's
hand carried the day. The Senate, after hearing the Federalist protest,
ratified the treaty. In December, 1803, the French flag was hauled down
By a single stroke, the original territory of the United States was more
safe to say that the Louisiana territory included what is now Arkansas,
Missouri, Iowa, Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska, South Dakota, and large
Wyoming. The farm lands that the friends of "a little America" on the
seacoast declared a hopeless wilderness were, within a hundred years,
fully occupied and valued at nearly seven billion dollars--almost five
hundred times the price paid to Napoleon.
began to make the most of it. He prepared for the opening of the new
country by sending the Lewis and Clark expedition to explore it,
discover its resources, and lay out an overland route through the
this mighty exploit, which began in the spring of 1804 and ended in the
autumn of 1806, was set down with skill and pains in the journal of
Lewis and Clark; when published even in a short form, it invited the
forward-looking men of the East to take thought about the western
empire. At the same time Zebulon Pike, in a series of journeys, explored
the sources of the Mississippi River and penetrated the Spanish
territories of the far Southwest. Thus scouts and pioneers continued the
THE REPUBLICAN WAR FOR COMMERCIAL INDEPENDENCE
had plagued the country all during the administrations of Washington and
defending his treaty, jeered Washington's proclamation of neutrality,
and spoken bitterly of "timid traders," could no longer take refuge in
Its troubles took a serious turn in 1806. England, in a determined
effort to bring France to her knees by starvation, declared the coast of
Europe blockaded from Brest to the mouth of the Elbe River. Napoleon
retaliated by his Berlin Decree of November, 1806, blockading the
British Isles--a measure terrifying to American ship owners whose
vessels were liable to seizure by any French rover, though Napoleon had
condition of their stopping at a British port, securing a license, and
paying a tax. This, responded Napoleon, was the height of insolence, and
he denounced it as a gross violation of international law. He then
closed the circle of American troubles by issuing his Milan Decree of
December, 1807. This order declared that any ship which complied with
the British rules would be subject to seizure and confiscation by French
authorities.
need of men for her navy, adopted the practice of stopping American
ships, searching them, and carrying away British-born sailors found on
was no test. Rovers on the deep and stragglers in the ports of both
countries, they frequently had no papers to show their nativity.
always an Englishman"--a doctrine rejected by the United States in
would give allegiance. British sea captains, sometimes by mistake, and
often enough with reckless indifference, carried away into servitude in
their own navy genuine American citizens. The process itself, even when
meant that American ships were forced to "come to," and compelled to
into records, questioned seamen, seized and handcuffed victims. Saints
knowledge of them to rumors and newspaper stories, American resentment
in sight of land. British and French vessels patrolled the coasts,
_Chesapeake_ refused to surrender men alleged to be deserters from King
men and wounding eighteen more--an act which even the British ministry
could hardly excuse. If the French were less frequently the offenders,
so few of their ships escaped the hawk-eyed British navy to operate in
American waters.
Atlantic Ocean. In a decade they had doubled the tonnage of American
merchant ships under the American flag, taking the place of the French
American shipping engaged in foreign trade embraced 363,110 tons in
1791; 669,921 tons in 1800; and almost 1,000,000 tons in 1810. Such was
the enterprise attacked by the British and French decrees. American
ships bound for Great Britain were liable to be captured by French
privateers which, in spite of the disasters of the Nile and Trafalgar,
failed to stop at British ports and pay tribute, were in great danger of
American sea captains who, in fear of British vengeance, heeded the
Orders in Council and paid the tax were almost certain to fall a prey to
French vengeance, for the French were vigorous in executing the Milan
=Jefferson's Policy.=--The President's dilemma was distressing. Both the
belligerents in Europe were guilty of depredations on American commerce.
impossible because she had no territory on this side of the water which
Britain, a power which Jefferson's followers feared and distrusted, was
disliked war's brazen clamor; a man of kindly spirit, he was startled at
the death and destruction which it brought in its train. So for the
eight years Jefferson steered an even course, suggesting measure after
measure with a view to avoiding bloodshed. He sent, it is true,
American commerce; but a great war he evaded with passionate
earnestness, trying in its place every other expedient to protect
American rights.
=The Embargo and Non-intercourse Acts.=--In 1806, Congress passed and
Jefferson approved a non-importation act closing American ports to
certain products from British dominions--a measure intended as a club
Jefferson proposed and Congress adopted in December, 1807, the Embargo
Act forbidding all vessels to leave American harbors for foreign ports.
France and England were to be brought to terms by cutting off their
by law to their home ports. Every section suffered. The South and West
sailors were thrown out of employment while the prices of foreign goods
doubled. Those who obeyed the law were ruined; violators of the law
smuggled goods into Canada and Florida for shipment abroad.
that brought neither relief nor honor. Beset by the clamor that arose on
repealed the Embargo law and substituted a Non-intercourse act
forbidding trade with England and France while permitting it with other
American shipping.
=Jefferson Retires in Favor of Madison.=--Jefferson, exhausted by
criticism, welcomed March 4, 1809. His friends urged him to "stay by the
ship" and accept a third term. He declined, saying that election for
life might result from repeated reelection. In following Washington's
unwritten law.
His intimate friend, James Madison, to whom he turned over the burdens
of his high office was, like himself, a man of peace. Madison had been a
leader since the days of the Revolution, but in legislative halls and
council chambers, not on the field of battle. Small in stature,
sensitive in feelings, studious in habits, he was no man for the rough
distinguished part in the framing and the adoption of the Constitution.
He had served in the first Congress as a friend of Hamilton's measures.
Later he attached himself to Jefferson's fortunes and served for eight
the Constitution, which he had helped to make and interpret, he was now
in all American history. In keeping with his own traditions and
following in the footsteps of Jefferson, he vainly tried to solve the
foreign problem by negotiation.
In the spring of 1811, a British frigate held up an American ship near
American warship, acting under orders, poured several broadsides into
the _Little Belt_, a British sloop, suspected of being the guilty party.
together the Indians of the Northwest under British protection and gave
signs of restlessness presaging a revolt. This sent a note of alarm
along the frontier that was not checked even when, in November,
Tecumseh's men were badly beaten at Tippecanoe by William Henry
the Red Men would soon be subdued.
=Clay and Calhoun.=--While events were moving swiftly and rumors were
flying thick and fast, the mastery of the government passed from the
dubbed "Young Republicans," under the leadership of two members destined
John C. Calhoun of South Carolina. The former contended, in a flair of
folly, that "the militia of Kentucky alone are competent to place
Montreal and Upper Canada at your feet." The latter with a light heart
spoke of conquering Canada in a four weeks' campaign. "It must not be
were actuated merely by desire for land; they welcomed war because they
thought it would be the easiest way to abate Indian troubles. The
Quebec and London.... The Southerners on their part wished for Florida
and they thought that the conquest of Canada would obviate some Northern
Calhoun, spokesmen of the West and South, were not unmindful of what
still on the throne, could be readily blown into flame.
adhering to the policy of "watchful waiting." One of them, a high Tory,
believed that all Americans were alike "except that a few are less
knaves than others" and his methods were colored by his belief. On the
recall of this minister the British government selected another no less
high and mighty in his principles and opinions. So Madison became
thoroughly discouraged about the outcome of pacific measures. When the
on June 18, 1812, the declaration of war on Great Britain. In
proclaiming hostilities, the administration set forth the causes which
Indians to attack American citizens on the frontier; they had ruined
American trade by blockades; they had insulted the American flag by
stopping and searching our ships; they had illegally seized American
sailors and driven them into the British navy.
=The Course of the War.=--The war lasted for nearly three years without
were offset by Perry's victory on Lake Erie and a decisive blow
Plattsburgh. The triumph of Jackson at New Orleans helped to atone for
the humiliation suffered in the burning of the Capitol by the British.
_Argus_ on the seas, the heroic death of Lawrence and the victories of a
hundred privateers furnished consolation for those who suffered from the
iron blockade finally established by the British government when it came
the sea, they will turn to the running battles, the narrow escapes, and
the reckless daring of American sailors in that naval contest with Great
Britain.
government less prepared than was that of the United States in 1812. It
had neither the disciplined troops, the ships of war, nor the supplies
financially embarrassed by nearly twenty years of fighting in Europe,
of 1814. War clouds still hung on the European horizon and the conflict
the United States, especially as that could be done without conceding
=The Treaty of Peace.=--Both countries were in truth sick of a war that
offered neither glory nor profit. Having indulged in the usual
diplomatic skirmishing, they sent representatives to Ghent to discuss
terms of peace. After long negotiations an agreement was reached on
When the treaty reached America the people were surprised to find that
it said nothing about the seizure of American sailors, the destruction
of American trade, the searching of American ships, or the support of
Indians on the frontier. Nevertheless, we are told, the people "passed
from gloom to glory" when the news of peace arrived. The bells were
rung; schools were closed; flags were displayed; and many a rousing
toast was drunk in tavern and private home. The rejoicing could
Great Britain had no need to impress sailors, search ships, and
confiscate American goods bound to the Continent. Once more the terrible
sea power sank into the background and the ocean was again white with
THE REPUBLICANS NATIONALIZED
=The Federalists Discredited.=--By a strange turn of fortune's wheel,
the party of Hamilton, Washington, Adams, the party of the grand nation,
became the party of provincialism and nullification. New England,
Britain, which meant the completion of the ruin already begun. In the
course of the struggle, the Federalist leaders came perilously near to
and in their desperation they fell back upon the doctrine of
nullification so recently condemned by them when it came from Kentucky.
The Senate of Massachusetts, while the war was in progress, resolved
seacoast and soil." A Boston newspaper declared that the union was
nothing but a treaty among sovereign states, that states could decide
for themselves the question of obeying federal law, and that armed
[Illustration: _From an old cartoon_
NEW ENGLAND JUMPING INTO THE HANDS OF GEORGE III]
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and certain counties of New Hampshire and
Vermont was held at Hartford, on the call of Massachusetts. The counsels
of the extremists were rejected but the convention solemnly went on
record to the effect that acts of Congress in violation of the
palpable infractions the state is duty bound to interpose its authority
for the protection of its citizens; and that when emergencies occur the
states must be their own judges and execute their own decisions. Thus
New England answered the challenge of Calhoun and Clay. Fortunately its
=The Second United States Bank.=--In driving the Federalists towards
nullification and waging a national war themselves, the Republicans lost
of reconstruction called forth by the war, they resorted to the national
devices of the Federalists. In 1816, they chartered for a period of
Jefferson and Madison once had condemned as unsound and
the young Republicans were taunted by some of their older party
colleagues with betraying the "agricultural interest" that Jefferson had
seas are open," he said, "the produce of the South may pour anywhere
into the markets of the Old World.... What are the effects of a war with
a maritime power--with England? Our commerce annihilated ... our
pressure on the growers of cotton and tobacco and the other great
event of another war unless prevented by the foresight of this body....
When our manufactures are grown to a certain perfection, as they soon
will be under the fostering care of the government, we shall no longer
defeat in the presidential campaign of 1816.
=Monroe and the Florida Purchase.=--To the victor in that political
importance, adding to the prestige of the whole country and deepening
the sense of patriotism that weaned men away from mere allegiance to
acquisition of Louisiana let the Mississippi flow "unvexed to the sea";
but it left all the states east of the river cut off from the Gulf,
pioneers of Kentucky to action a generation earlier. The uncertainty as
to the boundaries of Louisiana gave the United States a claim to West
Florida, setting on foot a movement for occupation. The Florida swamps
were a basis for Indian marauders who periodically swept into the
to seize the offenders, in the Floridas, if necessary. The high-spirited
warrior, taking this as a hint that he was to occupy the coveted region,
replied that, if possession was the object of the invasion, he could
this letter, he launched his expedition, and in the spring of 1818 was
inevitable by ceding the Floridas to the United States in return for
five million dollars to be paid to American citizens having claims
against Spain. On Washington's birthday, 1819, the treaty was signed. It
Mexico and the United States by drawing a line from the mouth of the
Sabine River in a northwesterly direction to the Pacific. On this
=The Monroe Doctrine.=--Even more effective in fashioning the national
idea was Monroe's enunciation of the famous doctrine that bears his
name. The occasion was another European crisis. During the Napoleonic
upheaval and the years of dissolution that ensued, the Spanish colonies
looked upon revolution and republics with undisguised horror.
sympathy. Three of them, Austria, Prussia, and Russia, under the
leadership of the Czar, Alexander I, in the autumn of 1815, had entered
into a Holy Alliance to sustain by reciprocal service the autocratic
principle in government. Although the effusive, almost maudlin, language
of the treaty did not express their purpose explicitly, the Alliance was
growth of popular government.
The American people thought their worst fears confirmed when, in 1822, a
Verona to consider, among other things, revolutions that had just broken
government is equally incompatible with the monarchical principle and
mutually engage in the most solemn manner to use all their efforts to
put an end to the system of representative government in whatever
those countries where it is not yet known." The Czar, who incidentally
coveted the west coast of North America, proposed to send an army to aid
the king of Spain in his troubles at home, thus preparing the way for
intervention in Spanish America. It was material weakness not want of
spirit, that prevented the grand union of monarchs from making open war
on popular government.
trade with the independent Latin-American colonies and they protested
against the restoration of Spanish sovereignty, which meant a renewal of
suffrage, and sweep on to even greater achievements. British statesmen,
therefore, had to be cautious. In such circumstances, instead of
cooperating with the autocrats of Russia, Austria, and Prussia, they
turned to the minister of the United States in London. The British prime
minister, Canning, proposed that the two countries join in declaring
their unwillingness to see the Spanish colonies transferred to any other
power.
_Jefferson's Advice._--The proposal was rejected; but President Monroe
Secretary of State, John Quincy Adams. They favored the plan. Jefferson
said: "One nation, most of all, could disturb us in this pursuit [of
freedom]; she now offers to lead, aid, and accompany us in it. By
acceding to her proposition we detach her from the bands, bring her
mighty weight into the scale of free government and emancipate a
continent at one stroke.... With her on our side we need not fear the
whole world. With her then we should most sedulously cherish a cordial
December 2, 1823, a statement of principles now famous throughout the
world as the Monroe Doctrine. To the autocrats of Europe he announced
to any portion of this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety."
While he did not propose to interfere with existing colonies dependent
on European powers, he ranged himself squarely on the side of those that
had declared their independence. Any attempt by a European power to
"a manifestation of an unfriendly disposition toward the United States."
World that "the American continents, by the free and independent
condition which they have assumed and maintained, are henceforth not to
be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European
powers." The effect of this declaration was immediate and profound. Men
whose political horizon had been limited to a community or state were
=The Missouri Compromise.=--Respecting one other important measure of
under the Constitution; namely, the Missouri Compromise. It is true,
against the free state of Maine; but at the same time they assented to
the prohibition of slavery in the Louisiana territory north of the line
abolishing slavery in the territories. The precedent of the Northwest
Ordinance, ratified by Congress in 1789, seemed a conclusive answer from
practice to this contention; but Monroe submitted the issue to his
cabinet, which included Calhoun of South Carolina, Crawford of Georgia,
and Wirt of Virginia, all presumably adherents to the Jeffersonian
principle of strict construction. He received in reply a unanimous
approved, on March 6, 1820, the bill establishing freedom north of the
compromise line. This generous interpretation of the powers of Congress
stood for nearly forty years, until repudiated by the Supreme Court in
the Dred Scott case.
=John Marshall, the Nationalist.=--The Republicans in the lower ranges
leaders charged with responsibilities in the national field, were
assisted in their education by a Federalist from the Old Dominion, John
Marshall, who, as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
political views have ever led even his warmest opponents to deny his
likewise agree that for talents, native and acquired, he was an ornament
American. Born on the frontier of Virginia, reared in a log cabin,
granted only the barest rudiments of education, inured to hardship and
rough life, he rose by masterly efforts to the highest judicial honor
America can bestow.
On him the bitter experience of the Revolution and of later days made a
lasting impression. He was no "summer patriot." He had been a soldier in
He had seen his comrades in arms starving and freezing because the
were the symbol of futility. Into the struggle for the formation of the
Constitution and its ratification in Virginia he had thrown himself with
to France, and Secretary of State, he had aided the Federalists in
establishing the new government. When at length they were driven from
power in the executive and legislative branches of the government, he
was chosen for their last stronghold, the Supreme Court. By historic
Jefferson; and, long after the author of the Declaration of Independence
announce the old Federalist principles from the Supreme Bench.
violates the Constitution. This power was not expressly conferred on the
until 1803 when the case of Marbury _vs._ Madison was decided. In
rendering the opinion of the Court, Marshall cited no precedents. He
reasoning, is the supreme law of the land; it limits and binds all who
act in the name of the United States; it limits the powers of Congress
then the Constitution disappears and Congress is supreme. Since,
however, the Constitution is supreme and superior to Congress, it is the
duty of judges, under their oath of office, to sustain it against
constitutional system the courts must declare null and void all acts
which are not authorized. "A law repugnant to the Constitution," he
closed, "is void and the courts as well as other departments are bound
by that instrument." From that day to this the practice of federal and
state courts in passing upon the constitutionality of laws has remained
unshaken.
This doctrine was received by Jefferson and many of his followers with
consternation. If the idea was sound, he exclaimed, "then indeed is our
Constitution a complete _felo de se_ [legally, a suicide]. For,
intending to establish three departments, coordinate and independent
that they might check and balance one another, it has given, according
to this opinion, to one of them alone the right to prescribe rules for
the government of the others, and to that one, too, which is unelected
hypothesis, is a mere thing of wax in the hands of the judiciary which
remembered, as an axiom of eternal truth in politics, that whatever
power in any government is independent, is absolute also.... A judiciary
though from time to time other men, clinging to Jefferson's opinion,
stopped with annulling an act of Congress, he would have heard less
criticism from Republican quarters; but, with the same firmness, he set
aside acts of state legislatures as well, whenever, in his opinion, they
violated the federal Constitution. In 1810, in the case of Fletcher
_vs._ Peck, he annulled an act of the Georgia legislature, informing the
state that it was not sovereign, but "a part of a large empire, ... a
which imposes limits to the legislatures of the several states." In the
United States Bank established in that state. In the same year, in the
still more memorable Dartmouth College case, he annulled an act of the
New Hampshire legislature which infringed upon the charter received by
the college from King George long before. That charter, he declared, was
under the federal Constitution could not impair. Two years later he
Court to answer in a case in which the validity of one of her laws was
involved and then justified his action in a powerful opinion rendered in
the case of Cohens _vs._ Virginia.
All these decisions aroused the legislatures of the states. They passed
sheaves of resolutions protesting and condemning; but Marshall never
turned and never stayed. The Constitution of the United States, he
Court is the proper tribunal to pass finally upon the validity of the
right of review and nullification, are irrevocably bound by the
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions and for the members of the Hartford
convention; but they had to take it.
=The Doctrine of Implied Powers.=--While restraining Congress in the
Marbury case and the state legislatures in a score of cases, Marshall
_vs._ Maryland, he construed generously the words "necessary and proper"
other things, the question whether the act establishing the second
in the affirmative. Congress, ran his reasoning, has large powers over
of these enumerated powers; and therefore, though not absolutely
to the means by which the powers that the Constitution confers are to be
assigned to it, in the manner most beneficial to the people." In short,
the Constitution of the United States is not a strait jacket but a
flexible instrument vesting in Congress the powers necessary to meet
national problems as they arise. In delivering this opinion Marshall
used language almost identical with that employed by Lincoln when,
standing on the battle field of a war waged to preserve the nation, he
SUMMARY OF THE UNION AND NATIONAL POLITICS
independence and the advent of Jacksonian democracy the great American
saw the threatened ruin of the country under the Articles of
parties, the growth of the West, the second war with England, and the
apparent triumph of the national spirit over sectionalism.
The new republic had hardly been started in 1783 before its troubles
expenses; it could not protect American commerce and manufactures
paper money by the states; it could not intervene to put down domestic
uprisings that threatened the existence of the state governments.
again. Washington, Hamilton, and Madison insisted that a new
the Congress to call a national convention to take into account the
months it debated and wrangled over plans for a constitution. The small
were jealousies between the planting states and the commercial states.
feared the growth of democracy and others cherished it. These factions
also had to be placated. At last a plan of government was drafted--the
Constitution of the United States--and submitted to the states for
approval. Only after a long and acrimonious debate did enough states
ratify the instrument to put it into effect. On April 30, 1789, George
Washington was inaugurated first President.
The new government proceeded to fund the old debt of the nation, assume
the bills, and enact laws protecting American industry and commerce.
opposition. He found a formidable antagonist in Jefferson. In time two
political parties appeared full armed upon the scene: the Federalists
and the Republicans. For ten years they filled the country with
political debate. In 1800 the Federalists were utterly vanquished by the
By their proclamations of faith the Republicans favored the states
immensely to the prestige and power of the nation. They purchased
Louisiana from France, they waged a war for commercial independence
the protective tariff of 1816, they declared that Congress had power to
Still America was a part of European civilization. Currents of opinion
it. When the king was executed and a radical democracy set up, American
opinion was divided. When France fell under the military dominion of
Napoleon and preyed upon American commerce, the United States made ready
The conduct of England likewise affected American affairs. In 1793 war
commerce, but England was the more serious offender because she had
command of the seas. Though Jefferson and Madison strove for peace, the
headed by Clay and Calhoun.
When the armed conflict was closed, one in diplomacy opened. The
in her attempt to recover possession of her Latin-American colonies.
Their challenge to America brought forth the Monroe Doctrine. The powers
of Europe were warned not to interfere with the independence or the
republican policies of this hemisphere or to attempt any new
colonization in it. It seemed that nationalism was to have a peaceful
triumph over sectionalism.
=References=
H. Adams, _History of the United States, 1800-1817_ (9 vols.).
E. Channing, _The Jeffersonian System_ (Same Series).
=Questions=
1. What was the leading feature of Jefferson's political theory?
3. Were the Jeffersonians able to apply their theories? Give the
reasons.
5. Show how events in Europe forced the Louisiana Purchase.
6. State the constitutional question involved in the Louisiana Purchase.
8. Compare the policies of Jefferson and Madison.
12. Give five "nationalist" measures of the Republicans. Discuss each in
detail.
=The Louisiana Purchase.=--Text of Treaty in Macdonald, _Documentary
the United States_, pp. 383-388.
=Congress and the War of 1812.=--Adams, Vol. VI, pp. 113-198; Elson, pp.
408-450.
the United States_, pp. 184-194.
=The Monroe Message.=--Macdonald, pp. 318-320.
=Lewis and Clark Expedition.=--R.G. Thwaites, _Rocky Mountain
PART IV. THE WEST AND JACKSONIAN DEMOCRACY
CHAPTER X
THE FARMERS BEYOND THE APPALACHIANS
The nationalism of Hamilton was undemocratic. The democracy of Jefferson
was, in the beginning, provincial. The historic mission of uniting
nationalism and democracy was in the course of time given to new leaders
nourished in the West was heard when Clay of Kentucky advocated his
supreme test whether this was a nation destined to survive or to perish.
earlier device--Republican--which Jefferson had made a sign of power.
with the democracy of Jefferson, and his appeal was clothed in the
simple language of the people, not in the sonorous rhetoric which
Webster learned in the schools.
of Great Britain in closing western land to easy settlement in 1763 was
Americans on the frontier did not forget it; when Indians were employed
by England to defend that land, zeal for the patriot cause set the
interior aflame. It was the members of the western vanguard, like Daniel
Boone, John Sevier, and George Rogers Clark, who first understood the
the Red Men still wielded the tomahawk and the scalping knife. It was
they who gave the East no rest until their vision was seen by the
leaders on the seaboard who directed the course of national policy. It
was one of their number, a seasoned Indian fighter, George Rogers Clark,
who with aid from Virginia seized Kaskaskia and Vincennes and secured
still hanging in the balance.
signed with Great Britain in 1783, brought the definite cession of the
coveted territory west to the Mississippi River, but it left unsolved
Ohio region, even though British support was withdrawn at last, had to
be reckoned with; and it was not until after the establishment of the
still occupied forts on Lake Erie pending the execution of the terms of
ratification of the Jay treaty twelve years later. In the third place,
Virginia, Connecticut, and Massachusetts had conflicting claims to the
land in the Northwest based on old English charters and Indian treaties.
It was only after a bitter contest that the states reached an agreement
Virginia executing her deed of cession on March 1, 1784. In the fourth
place, titles to lands bought by individuals remained uncertain in the
absence of official maps and records. To meet this last situation,
Congress instituted a systematic survey of the Ohio country, laying it
every township one section of land was set aside for the support of
public schools.
=The Northwest Ordinance.=--The final problem which had to be solved
the territory. Pioneers who looked with hungry eyes on the fertile
the Revolution, who had been paid for their services in land warrants
entitling them to make entries in the West, called for action.
providing for temporary territorial government to be followed by the
males in any district. Eventual admission to the union on an equal
regular judicial procedure, and _habeas corpus_ were established, in order
that the methods of civilized life might take the place of the
rough-and-ready justice of lynch law. During the course of the debate on
involuntary servitude.
south of the Ohio, ceded by North Carolina to the national government,
for the benefit of the parent states (any more than for the benefit of
outcome, bitterly opposed by some Eastern leaders who feared the triumph
of Western states over the seaboard, completed the legal steps necessary
by way of preparation for the flood of settlers.
=The Land Companies, Speculators, and Western Land Tenure.=--As in the
companies and single proprietors of large grants early figured. In 1787
the Ohio Land Company, a New England concern, acquired a million and a
half acres on the Ohio and began operations by planting the town of
acres lower down where the city of Cincinnati was founded. Other
individuals bought up soldiers' claims and so acquired enormous holdings
for speculative purposes. Indeed, there was such a rush to make fortunes
out against the "rage for speculating in and forestalling of land on the
North West of the Ohio," protesting that "scarce a valuable spot within
any tolerable distance of it is left without a claimant." He therefore
urged Congress to fix a reasonable price for the land, not "too
still looked upon the sale of public lands as an important source of
more of instant income than of ultimate results. It placed no limit on
in 1796, and it encouraged the professional land operator by making the
first installment only twenty cents an acre in addition to the small
registration and survey fee. On such terms a speculator with a few
thousand dollars could get possession of an enormous plot of land. If he
himself. Even when the credit or installment feature was abolished in
1821 and the price of the land lowered to a cash price of $1.75 an acre,
the opportunity for large speculative purchases continued to attract
capital to land ventures.
scarcity of labor, nevertheless, made impossible the triumph of the huge
due in forty days; but a four-year term was allowed for the discharge of
the balance. With a capital of from two to three hundred dollars a
meet the deferred payments. It was, however, a hard battle at best. Many
yet in the end, in spite of all the handicaps, the small freehold of a
few hundred acres at most became the typical unit of Western
agriculture, except in the planting states of the Gulf. Even the lands
The tendency toward moderate holdings, so favored by Western conditions,
the land of any person dying intestate--that is, without any will
Hildreth says of this provision: "It established the important
republican principle, not then introduced into all the states, of the
equal distribution of landed as well as personal property." All these
THE WESTERN MIGRATION AND NEW STATES
=The People.=--With government established, federal arms victorious over
the immigrants. They came with a rush. Young New Englanders, weary of
tilling the stony soil of their native states, poured through New York
servitude pressed out into Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee, or beyond. From
numbers. Indeed one historian of high authority has ventured to say that
"the rapid expansion of the United States from a coast strip to a
Americans of mixed stocks led the way into the West, it was not long
Timothy Flint, who published his entertaining _Recollections_ in 1826,
found the West a strange mixture of all sorts and conditions of people.
Mississippi, above the falls of St. Anthony. Some had been still farther
north, in Canada. Still others had wandered from the South--the Gulf of
Mexico, the Red River, and the Spanish country. French boatmen and
trappers, Spanish traders from the Southwest, Virginia planters with
their droves of slaves mingled with English, German, and Scotch-Irish
like the foaming combers of an advancing tide, went first. Then followed
the farmers, masters of the ax and plow, with their wives who shared
civilized life. The hunters and rangers passed on to new scenes; the
home makers built for all time.
=The Number of Immigrants.=--There were no official stations on the
the decades following the American Revolution. But travelers of the time
their wagons and cattle; and that they were seldom out of the sound of
latter half of 1787," says Coman, "more than nine hundred boats floated
down the Ohio carrying eighteen thousand men, women, and children, and
wagons." Other lines of travel were also crowded and with the passing
=The Western Routes.=--Four main routes led into the country beyond the
to the present site of Buffalo on Lake Erie, through a level country. In
the dry season, wagons laden with goods could easily pass along it into
northern Ohio. A second route, through Pittsburgh, was fed by three
another at Alexandria. A third main route wound through the mountains
from Alexandria to Boonesboro in Kentucky and then westward across the
the Cumberland Gap and by branches extended into the Cumberland valley
Of these four lines of travel, the Pittsburgh route offered the most
they were on the headwaters of the Ohio and in possession of a flatboat,
could find a quick and easy passage into all parts of the West and
Tennessee they could find their way down the drifting flood to their
destination or at least to some spot near it. Many people from the South
as well as the Northern and Middle states chose this route; so it came
of the Northwest territory.
=The Methods of Travel into the West.=--Many stories giving exact
been preserved. The country was hardly opened before visitors from the
Old World and from the Eastern states, impelled by curiosity, made their
way to the very frontier of civilization and wrote books to inform or
amuse the public. One of them, Gilbert Imlay, an English traveler, has
a man ... " he writes, "has a family or goods of any sort to remove, his
best way, then, would be to purchase a waggon and team of horses to
carry his property to Redstone Old Fort or to Pittsburgh, according as
cost, at Philadelphia, about $10 ... and the horses about $12 each; they
that, there are inns of accommodation the whole distance on the
different roads.... The provisions I would purchase in the same manner
camp kettles and stopping every evening when the weather is fine upon
the brink of some rivulet and by kindling a fire they may soon dress
their own food.... This manner of journeying is so far from being
disagreeable that in a fine season it is extremely pleasant." The
immigrant once at Pittsburgh or Wheeling could then buy a flatboat of a
[Illustration: ROADS AND TRAILS INTO THE WESTERN TERRITORY]
=The Admission of Kentucky and Tennessee.=--When the eighteenth century
drew to a close, Kentucky had a population larger than Delaware, Rhode
Kentucky took her place as a state beside her none too kindly parent,
Virginia. The Eastern Federalists resented her intrusion; but they took
some consolation in the admission of Vermont because the balance of
As if to assert their independence of old homes and conservative ideas
Four years later, Kentucky's neighbor to the south, Tennessee, followed
from the Federalists, Tennessee was accepted as the sixteenth state.
=Ohio.=--The door of the union had hardly opened for Tennessee when
another appeal was made to Congress, this time from the pioneers in
Ohio. The little posts founded at Marietta and Cincinnati had grown into
around poured produce into their markets to be exchanged for "store
soldier left the frontier forts under the terms of the Jay treaty of
1795, tiny settlements of families appeared on Lake Erie in the "Western
Reserve," a region that had been retained by Connecticut when she
surrendered her other rights in the Northwest.
50,000, grew discontented with its territorial status. Indeed, two years
region had been invited by one John Emerson to hold a convention after
the fashion of the men of Hartford, Windsor, and Wethersfield in old
Connecticut and draft a frame of government for themselves. This true
son of New England declared that men "have an undoubted right to pass
from the confederation of the whole United States Congress is not
empowered to forbid them." This grand convention was never held because
the heavy hand of the government fell upon the leaders; but the spirit
of John Emerson did not perish. In November, 1802, a convention chosen
by voters, assembled under the authority of Congress at Chillicothe,
drew up a constitution. It went into force after a popular ratification.
The roll of the convention bore such names as Abbot, Baldwin, Cutler,
Washington, showing that the new America in the West was peopled and led
by the old stock. In 1803 Ohio was admitted to the union.
=Indiana and Illinois.=--As in the neighboring state, the frontier in
however, of settlers from the South--restless Kentuckians hoping for
better luck in a newer country and pioneers from the far frontiers of
upward like the horns of the moon against Ohio on the east and in the
Corydon. "The majority of the members of the convention," we are told by
a local historian, "were frontier farmers who had a general idea of what
they wanted and had sense enough to let their more erudite colleagues
put it into shape."
Ohio, like Indiana, elected their delegates to draft a constitution.
Leadership in the convention, quite properly, was taken by a man born in
numbered."
far south, clearing and planting had gone on with much bustle and
and Spanish settlers, were widened in every direction by planters with
their armies of slaves from the older states. New Orleans, a good market
1810 the population of lower Louisiana was over 75,000. The time had
come, said the leaders of the people, to fulfill the promise made to
the territory statehood and the rights of American citizens. Federalists
from New England still having a voice in Congress, if somewhat weaker,
deliberate opinion," pronounced Josiah Quincy in the House of
bonds of this Union are virtually dissolved ... that as it will be the
definitely for a separation; amicably if they can, violently if they
must.... It is a death blow to the Constitution. It may afterwards
their doubts about the wisdom of admitting Western states; but the party
coveted statehood to Louisiana in 1812.
the union, the Federalists had so little influence, on account of their
conduct during the second war with England, that spokesmen from the
Southwest met a kindlier reception at Washington. Mississippi, in 1817,
and Alabama, in 1819, took their places among the United States of
America. Both of them, while granting white manhood suffrage, gave their
constitutions the tone of the old East by providing landed
qualifications for the governor and members of the legislature.
=Missouri.=--Far to the north in the Louisiana purchase, a new
commonwealth was rising to power. It was peopled by immigrants who came
Kentucky and Tennessee. Thrifty Germans from Pennsylvania, hardy farmers
from Virginia ready to work with their own hands, freemen seeking
freemen's homes, planters with their slaves moving on from worn-out
Missouri country. Peoples from the North and South flowed together,
small farmers and big planters mingling in one community. When their
as Jefferson phrased it. The favorite expedient of compromise with
slavery was brought forth in Congress once more. Maine consequently was
brought into the union without slavery and Missouri with slavery. At the
same time there was drawn westward through the rest of the Louisiana
territory a line separating servitude from slavery.
THE SPIRIT OF THE FRONTIER
an unbroken system of freehold farms. In the Gulf states and the lower
led in the pioneer movement; but through large sections of Tennessee and
Northwest territory the small farmer reigned supreme. In this immense
deriving their livelihood from one source: the labor of their own hands
on the soil. The Northwest territory alone almost equaled in area all
the original thirteen states combined, except Georgia, and its system of
agricultural economy was unbroken by plantations and feudal estates. "In
the subdivision of the soil and the great equality of condition," as
Jacksonian democracy.
=The Characteristics of the Western People.=--Travelers into the
that the people of that region were almost uniformly marked by the
characteristics common to an independent yeomanry. A close observer thus
recorded his impressions: "A spirit of adventurous enterprise, a
Independence of thought and action. They have felt the influence of
these principles from their childhood. Men who can endure anything; that
manner.... Where there is perfect equality in a neighborhood of people
who know little about each other's previous history or ancestry but
that the best of families can expect to have for years and of course can
imaginary insults which one witnesses among people of the West."
This equality, this independence, this rudeness so often described by
the traveler as marking a new country, were all accentuated by the
character of the settlers themselves. Traces of the fierce, unsociable,
farmers of the "middling order," and mechanics from the towns,--English,
Scotch-Irish, Germans,--poor in possessions and thrown upon the labor of
their own hands for support. Sons and daughters from well-to-do Eastern
homes sometimes brought softer manners; but the equality of life and the
leveling force of labor in forest and field soon made them one in spirit
with their struggling neighbors. Even the preachers and teachers, who
Cartwright's _A Muscular Christian_ or Eggleston's _The Hoosier
=The East Alarmed.=--A people so independent as the Westerners and so
Spaniards; and seriously did he urge the East not to neglect them, lest
Taking advantage of the restless spirit in the Southwest, Aaron Burr,
West, with its new democracy, would have been held in perpetual tutelage
to the seaboard or perhaps been driven into independence as the thirteen
many Eastern leaders, particularly from the South, who understood the
West, approved its spirit, and sought to bring the two sections together
by common bonds. Washington kept alive and keen the zeal for Western
tired of urging upon his Eastern friends the importance of the lands
beyond the mountains. He pressed upon the governor of Virginia a project
for a wagon road connecting the seaboard with the Ohio country and was
advocated strengthening the ties of commerce. "Smooth the roads," he
said, "and make easy the way for them, and then see what an influx of
articles will be poured upon us; how amazingly our exports will be
increased by them; and how amply we shall be compensated for any trouble
and expense we may encounter to effect it." Jefferson, too, was
the exploration of waterways, the opening of trade, and even the
discovery of the bones of prehistoric animals. Robert Fulton, the
inventor of the steamboat, was another man of vision who for many years
pressed upon his countrymen the necessity of uniting East and West by a
canal which would cement the union, raise the value of the public lands,
=The Difficulties of Early Transportation.=--Means of communication
played an important part in the strategy of all those who sought to
bring together the seaboard and the frontier. The produce of the
West--wheat, corn, bacon, hemp, cattle, and tobacco--was bulky and the
cost of overland transportation was prohibitive. In the Eastern market,
"a cow and her calf were given for a bushel of salt, while a suit of
for everything that was brought across the mountains. Scows of from five
to fifty tons were built at the towns along the rivers and piloted down
the stream to the Crescent City. In a few cases small ocean-going
vessels were built to transport goods to the West Indies or to the
Eastern coast towns. Salt, iron, guns, powder, and the absolute
=The National Road.=--To far-sighted men, like Albert Gallatin, "the
Congress dedicated a part of the proceeds from the sale of lands to
building highways from the headwaters of the navigable waters emptying
into the Atlantic to the Ohio River and beyond into the Northwest
territory. In 1806, after many misgivings, it authorized a great
national highway binding the East and the West. The Cumberland Road, as
shot almost straight across Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, into Missouri.
By 1817, stagecoaches were running between Washington and Wheeling; by
1833 contractors had carried their work to Columbus, Ohio, and by 1852,
to Vandalia, Illinois. Over this ballasted road mail and passenger
safety at a steady pace.
=Canals and Steamboats.=--A second epoch in the economic union of the
About the same time, Ohio built a canal across the state, affording
water communication between Lake Erie and the Ohio River through a rich
wheat belt. Passengers could now travel by canal boat into the West with
comparative ease and comfort, if not at a rapid speed, and the bulkiest
Mississippi Valley.
steamboats which appeared on the Ohio about 1810, three years after
day on the new steamer _Grecian_ "against the whole weight of the
Mississippi current." Three years later the round trip from Louisville
to New Orleans was cut to eight days. Heavy produce that once had to
float down to New Orleans could be carried upstream and sent to the East
by way of the canal systems.
[Illustration: _From an old print_
AN EARLY MISSISSIPPI STEAMBOAT]
Thus the far country was brought near. The timid no longer hesitated at
the thought of the perilous journey. All routes were crowded with
Western immigrants. The forests fell before the ax like grain before the
sickle. Clearings scattered through the woods spread out into a great
343,000 to Indiana; 157,000 to Illinois; 687,000 to Kentucky; and
[Illustration: DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION, 1830]
With the increase in population and the growth of agriculture came
in 1824 by giving only three electoral votes for John Quincy Adams; and
Jackson, to take Washington's chair as chief executive of the
nation--the first of a long line of Presidents from the Mississippi
=References=
T. Roosevelt, _Thomas H. Benton_.
P.J. Treat, _The National Land System_ (1785-1820).
=Questions=
1. How did the West come to play a role in the Revolution?
2. What preparations were necessary to settlement?
3. Give the principal provisions of the Northwest Ordinance.
How did they travel?
6. Explain the Eastern opposition to the admission of new Western
states. Show how it was overcome.
7. Trace a connection between the economic system of the West and the
10. Show how trade was promoted.
=Research Topics=
=Northwest Ordinance.=--Analysis of text in Macdonald, _Documentary
=The West before the Revolution.=--Roosevelt, Vol. I.
=The West during the Revolution.=--Roosevelt, Vols. II and III.
=Tennessee.=--Roosevelt, Vol. V, pp. 95-119 and Vol. VI, pp. 9-87.
United States_, pp. 617-633; 636-641.
=Slavery in the Southwest.=--Callender, pp. 641-652.
=Early Land Policy.=--Callender, pp. 668-680.
Lists of books dealing with the early history of Western states are
given in Hart, Channing, and Turner, _Guide to the Study and Reading of
=Kentucky.=--Roosevelt, Vol. IV, pp. 176-263.
CHAPTER XI
among those parties a strong affinity between their great and general
materially affected and unless the practice be modified must ultimately
be destroyed. The Southern states will first avail themselves of their
multiplied in number, and augmented in population, will control the
of a new urban democracy that was to make common cause with the farmers
beyond the mountains.
THE DEMOCRATIC MOVEMENT IN THE EAST
fathers, in setting up their first state constitutions, although they
often spoke of government as founded on the consent of the governed, did
On the contrary they looked upon property owners as the only safe
"depositary" of political power. They went back to the colonial
In carrying their theory into execution they placed taxpaying or
property qualifications on the right to vote. Broadly speaking, these
Virginia, Delaware, and Rhode Island, clung firmly to the ancient
principles that only freeholders could be intrusted with electoral
accepted the ownership of other things as well as land in fulfillment of
the requirements. In Massachusetts, for instance, the vote was granted
to all men who held land yielding an annual income of three pounds or
possessed other property worth sixty pounds.
The electors thus enfranchised, numerous as they were, owing to the wide
distribution of land, often suffered from a very onerous disability. In
heavy property qualifications were imposed on public officers. In New
five thousand pounds, one thousand of which was freehold; in North
worth six hundred pounds; in New Jersey, one thousand pounds' worth of
property; in North Carolina, three hundred acres of land; in South
Carolina, two thousand pounds freehold. For members of the lower house
further restricted by religious provisions. No single sect was powerful
North Carolina and Georgia denied the ballot to any one who was not a
Protestant. Delaware withheld it from all who did not believe in the
Trinity and the inspiration of the Scriptures. Massachusetts and
their day, made no discrimination in government on account of religious
=The Defense of the Old Order.=--It must not be supposed that property
qualifications were thoughtlessly imposed at the outset or considered of
little consequence in practice. In the beginning they were viewed as
government, saying: "It is entirely just that property should have its
due weight and consideration in political arrangements.... The
disastrous revolutions which the world has witnessed, those political
to their deepest foundations, have been revolutions against property."
In Pennsylvania, a leader in local affairs cried out against a plan to
remove the taxpaying limitation on the suffrage: "What does the delegate
hordes of our large cities on the level with the virtuous and good man?"
qualifications and had feared with genuine alarm the "mobs of the great
cities." It was near the end of the eighteenth century before he
convince the constitution-makers of his own state. "It is not an idle
chimera of the brain," urged one of them, "that the possession of land
furnishes the strongest evidence of permanent, common interest with, and
place the right of suffrage. This is the best general standard which can
be resorted to for the purpose of determining whether the persons to be
invested with the right of suffrage are such persons as could be,
consistently with the safety and well-being of the community, intrusted
=Attacks on the Restricted Suffrage.=--The changing circumstances of
American life, however, soon challenged the rule of those with property.
interests. Where the freehold qualification was applied, business men
who did not own land were deprived of the vote and excluded from office.
therefore, to find business men taking the lead in breaking down
uprising in Rhode Island which brought the exclusive rule by freeholders
to an end.
In addition to the business and professional classes, the mechanics of
the towns showed a growing hostility to a system of government that
numerous, they had early begun to exercise an influence on the course of
King George's statue, and "crammed stamps down the throats of
collectors." When the state constitutions were framed they took a lively
the "mechanicks in union" in New York protested against putting the new
the right to vote on the acceptance or rejection of a fundamental law
"is the birthright of every man to whatever state he may belong." Though
the process with deep concern; they knew that one of its main objects
was to promote trade and commerce, affecting directly their daily bread.
During the struggle over ratification, they passed resolutions approving
sentiment for the Constitution, even though they could not vote for
members of the state conventions and so express their will directly.
law and thus became interested in the election of judges and lawmakers.
Those who attacked the old system of class rule found a strong moral
are created equal? Whoever runs may read. Was it not declared that
That doctrine was applied with effect to George III and seemed
appropriate for use against the privileged classes of Massachusetts or
the existing regulation of the suffrage? A regulation which, instead of
the equality nature ordains, creates an odious distinction between
members of the same community ... and vests in a favored class, not in
consideration of their public services but of their private possessions,
the highest of all privileges."
=Abolition of Property Qualifications.=--By many minor victories rather
than by any spectacular triumphs did the advocates of manhood suffrage
part in the contest over the Constitution of 1776, were able to force
the qualification down to the payment of a small tax. Vermont came into
conservative, decided that all taxpayers were worthy of the ballot.
Five states, Massachusetts, New York, Virginia, Rhode Island, and North
Carolina, remained obdurate while these changes were going on around
Webster, in the prime of his manhood, and John Adams, in the closing
as manhood suffrage. Their protests were futile. The property test was
five years, went completely over to white manhood suffrage in 1826.
agitation. Then Dorr's Rebellion, almost culminating in bloodshed,
of land as the test for political rights until 1850 and the latter until
1856. Although religious discriminations and property qualifications for
[Illustration: THOMAS DORR AROUSING HIS FOLLOWERS]
At the end of the first quarter of the nineteenth century, the white
least, could lay aside the petition for the ballot and enjoy with the
"Universal democracy," sighed Carlyle, who was widely read in the United
States, "whatever we may think of it has declared itself the inevitable
or lead in these days must begin by admitting that ... Where no
recompense for himself, democracy may subsist; not elsewhere." Amid the
committed to the great adventure, in the populous towns of the East as
electors were not long in demanding for themselves a larger share in
=The Spoils System and Rotation in Office.=--First of all they wanted
positions--a system early established in several states, notably New
York and Pennsylvania. Closely connected with it was the practice of
fixing short terms for officers and making frequent changes in
personnel. "Long continuance in office," explained a champion of this
idea in Pennsylvania in 1837, "unfits a man for the discharge of its
destruction of free government." The solution offered was the historic
geologists, veterinarians, surveyors, and other technical officers were
declared elective on the theory that their appointment "smacked of
monarchy."
=Popular Election of Presidential Electors.=--In a short time the spirit
of democracy, while playing havoc with the old order in state
government, made its way upward into the federal system. The framers of
the Constitution, bewildered by many proposals and unable to agree on
any single plan, had committed the choice of presidential electors to
the discretion of the state legislatures. The legislatures, in turn,
greedy of power, early adopted the practice of choosing the electors
the people. Reluctantly they yielded, sometimes granting popular
election and then withdrawing it. The drift was inevitable, and the
climax came with the advent of Jacksonian democracy. In 1824, Vermont,
New York, Delaware, South Carolina, Georgia, and Louisiana, though some
had experimented with popular election, still left the choice of
electors with the legislature. Eight years later South Carolina alone
The fanciful idea of an electoral college of "good and wise men,"
selected without passion or partisanship by state legislatures acting as
deliberative bodies, was exploded for all time; the election of the
democracy.
popular choice of presidential electors extended, there arose a violent
protest against the methods used by the political parties in nominating
candidates. After the retirement of Washington, both the Republicans and
the Federalists found it necessary to agree upon their favorites before
caucus. The Federalist members of Congress held a conference and
selected their candidate, and the Republicans followed the example. In
became a recognized institution. The election still remained with the
people; but the power of picking candidates for their approval passed
into the hands of a small body of Senators and Representatives.
A reaction against this was unavoidable. To friends of "the plain
because the caucus never favored him with the nomination. More
conservative men also found grave objections to it. They pointed out
congressmen. The supremacy of the legislative branch had been obtained
place of party conflicts, the congressional caucus selected as the
candidate, William H. Crawford, of Georgia, a man of distinction but no
The followers of the General were enraged and demanded nothing short of
of delegates "fresh from the people," as Jackson was wont to say. In
seekers, and the new institution was soon denounced as vigorously as
nomination. Still it grew in strength and by 1840 was firmly
established.
=The End of the Old Generation.=--In the election of 1824, the
Until then the leadership by men of "wealth and talents" had been
undisputed. There had been five Presidents--Washington, John Adams,
families with the advantages of culture which come from leisure and the
to work with his hands for a livelihood. Four of them had been
slaveholders. Jefferson was a philosopher, learned in natural science, a
"with all the culture of his century." Monroe was a graduate of William
and Mary, a gentleman of the old school. Jefferson and his three
successors called themselves Republicans and professed a genuine faith
in the people but they were not "of the people" themselves; they were
old order of society" who gave finish and style even to popular
government.
after the adoption of the Constitution. In short, he was of the age that
had wrought American independence and set the government afloat. With
his passing, leadership went to a new generation; but his successor,
he combined a high degree of culture with democratic sympathies.
Washington had died in 1799, preceded but a few months by Patrick Henry
and followed in four years by Samuel Adams. Hamilton had been killed in
a duel with Burr in 1804. Thomas Jefferson and John Adams were yet alive
full of years and honors. Madison was in dignified retirement, destined
to live long enough to protest against the doctrine of nullification
proclaimed by South Carolina before death carried him away at the ripe
old age of eighty-five.
=The Election of John Quincy Adams (1824).=--The campaign of 1824 marked
candidates, John Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay, and W.H.
Constitution, therefore, the selection of President passed to the House
make him President. Jackson shook hands cordially with Adams on the day
While Adams called himself a Republican in politics and often spoke of
"the rule of the people," he was regarded by Jackson's followers as "an
aristocrat." He was not a son of the soil. Neither was he acquainted at
first hand with the labor of farmers and mechanics. He had been educated
was a stern and reserved man, little given to seeking popularity.
Moreover, he was from the East and the frontiersmen of the West regarded
him as a man "born with a silver spoon in his mouth." Jackson's
supporters especially disliked him because they thought their hero
entitled to the presidency. Their anger was deepened when Adams
appointed Clay to the office of Secretary of State; and they set up a
cry that there had been a "deal" by which Clay had helped to elect Adams
the West and South. On the contrary, by advocating government assistance
arts, and sciences, he ran counter to the current which had set in
signing the Tariff Bill of 1828, soon known as the "Tariff of
York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio where he sorely needed them. Handicapped by
the false charge that he had been a party to a "corrupt bargain" with
office-holders" in Washington on account of his refusal to discharge
House after he had served four years.
=The Triumph of Jackson in 1828.=--Probably no candidate for the
had in 1828. He was truly a man of the people. Born of poor parents in
without the advantages of education or the refinements of cultivated
leisure, he seemed the embodiment of the spirit of the new American
democracy. Early in his youth he had gone into the frontier of Tennessee
where he soon won a name as a fearless and intrepid Indian fighter. On
the march and in camp, he endeared himself to his men by sharing their
hardships, sleeping on the ground with them, and eating parched corn
when nothing better could be found for the privates. From local
prominence he sprang into national fame by his exploit at the battle of
feeling that he had been a martyr to political treachery in 1824. The
the Eastern cities, newly enfranchised, also looked upon him as their
friend. Though his views on the tariff, internal improvements, and other
issues before the country were either vague or unknown, he was readily
elected President.
The returns of the electoral vote in 1828 revealed the sources of
Jackson's power. In New England, he received but one ballot, from
Maine; he had a majority of the electors in New York and all of them in
Pennsylvania; and he carried every state south of Maryland and beyond
the Appalachians. Adams did not get a single electoral vote in the South
and West. The prophecy of the Hartford convention had been fulfilled.
[Illustration: ANDREW JACKSON]
When Jackson took the oath of office on March 4, 1829, the government of
the United States entered into a new era. Until this time the
inauguration of a President--even that of Jefferson, the apostle of
old-fashioned gentleman, accompanied by a few servants, had driven to
the White House in his own coach, taken the oath with quiet dignity,
long list of regular civil employees, and begun his administration with
throngs pressed into the White House, "upset the bowls of punch, broke
chairs to see the people's President." If Jefferson's inauguration was,
as he called it, the "great revolution," Jackson's inauguration was a
cataclysm.
THE NEW DEMOCRACY AT WASHINGTON
was disturbed by this influx of farmers and frontiersmen. To speak of
civil servants of the government who had enjoyed long and secure tenure
of office became alarmed at the clamor of new men for their positions.
With a hunter's instinct, Jackson scented his prey. Determined to have
employees to make room for men "fresh from the people." This was a new
custom. Other Presidents had discharged a few officers for engaging in
opposition politics. They had been careful in making appointments not to
choose inveterate enemies; but they discharged relatively few men on
account of their political views and partisan activities.
grounds--a practice already well intrenched in New York--Jackson
established the "spoils system" at Washington. The famous slogan, "to
the victor belong the spoils of victory," became the avowed principle of
the national government. Statesmen like Calhoun denounced it; poets like
thereafter, each succeeding generation outdoing, if possible, its
predecessor in the use of public office for political purposes. If any
for important public positions, he met Jackson's own profession of
faith: "The duties of any public office are so simple or admit of being
=The Tariff and Nullification.=--Jackson had not been installed in power
very long before he was compelled to choose between states' rights and
nationalism. The immediate occasion of the trouble was the tariff--a
did not run naturally to abstruse economic questions; and owing to the
divided opinion of the country it was "good politics" to be vague and
tariff issue was threatening to split the country into parties again.
_The Development of the Policy of "Protection."_--The war of 1812 and
need for American economic independence. During that conflict, the
steel, cloth, and other military and naval supplies as well as the
up as in the night; hundreds of business men invested fortunes in
industrial enterprises so essential to the military needs of the
American-made goods again. As the London _Times_ tersely observed of the
Americans, "their first war with England made them independent; their
industries" by dumping the accumulated stores of years suddenly upon
centers the demand for American agricultural produce. It accomplished
the purposes of its framers. It kept in operation the mills and furnaces
another very important result. It turned the capital and enterprise of
New England from shipping to manufacturing, and converted her statesmen,
In the early years of the nineteenth century, the Yankees had bent their
energies toward building and operating ships to carry produce from
America to Europe and manufactures from Europe to America. For this
reason, they had opposed the tariff of 1816 calculated to increase
efforts, they accepted the inevitable and turned to manufacturing. Soon
they were powerful friends of protection for American enterprise. As the
money invested and the labor employed in the favored industries
increased, the demand for continued and heavier protection grew apace.
Even the farmers who furnished raw materials, like wool, flax, and hemp,
of New England, the iron masters of Connecticut, New Jersey, and
states on the seaboard had forgotten about the havoc wrought during the
had swiftly expanded as Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana were opened
prosperity, as they thought, upon the sale of their staple to English
manufacturers whose spinning and weaving mills were the wonder of the
world. Manufacturing nothing and having to buy nearly everything except
farm produce and even much of that for slaves, the planters naturally
on them for the benefit of the Northern mill owners.
_The Tariff of Abominations._--They were overborne, however, in 1824 and
again in 1828 when Northern manufacturers and Western farmers forced
"the straw which broke the camel's back." Southern leaders turned in
rage against the whole system. The legislatures of Virginia, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama denounced it; a general
against it; and South Carolina, weary of verbal battles, decided to
prevent its enforcement.
_South Carolina Nullifies the Tariff._--The legislature of that state,
duly assembled in the following month. In no mood for compromise, it
Every line of this document was clear and firm. The tariff, it opened,
violation of the Constitution of the United States and therefore null
and void; its enforcement in South Carolina is unlawful; if the federal
government attempts to coerce the state into obeying the law, "the
with the people of the other states and will forthwith proceed to
sovereign and independent states may of right do."
this note of defiance, couched in the language used in the Kentucky
resolutions and by the New England Federalists during the war of 1812,
taken. Georgia responded: "We abhor the doctrine of nullification as
denying that South Carolina could find in them any sanction for her
upon Andrew Jackson. It was known that he looked with no friendly
1830 while the subject was in the air, he had with laconic firmness
announced a toast: "Our federal union; it must be preserved." When two
years later the open challenge came from South Carolina, he replied that
he would enforce the law, saying with his frontier directness: "If a
engaged in such conduct upon the first tree that I can reach." He made
ready to keep his word by preparing for the use of military and naval
pointed out the national character of the union, and announced his
he branded as "incompatible with the existence of the union,
contradicted expressly by the letter of the Constitution, unauthorized
by its spirit, inconsistent with every principle on which it was
suggested that protection should be limited to the articles of domestic
manufacture indispensable to safety in war time, and shortly afterward
he asked for new legislation to aid him in enforcing the laws. With two
propositions before it, one to remove the chief grounds for South
Congress bent its efforts to avoid a crisis. On February 12, 1833,
Henry Clay laid before the Senate a compromise tariff bill providing for
time the "force bill," designed to give the President ample authority in
executing the law in South Carolina, was taken up. After a short but
Jackson on the same day, March 2. Looking upon the reduction of the
tariff as a complete vindication of her policy and an undoubted victory,
South Carolina rescinded her ordinance and enacted another nullifying
_The Webster-Hayne Debate._--Where the actual victory lay in this
quarrel, long the subject of high dispute, need not concern us to-day.
Perhaps the chief result of the whole affair was a clarification of the
issue between the North and the South--a definite statement of the
principles for which men on both sides were years afterward to lay down
their lives. On behalf of nationalism and a perpetual union, the stanch
old Democrat from Tennessee had, in his proclamation on nullification,
courtly orator, had in a great speech delivered in the Senate in
January, 1830, set forth clearly and cogently the doctrine that the
union is a compact among sovereign states from which the parties may
lawfully withdraw. It was this address that called into the arena
Daniel Webster, Senator from Massachusetts, who, spreading the mantle
of oblivion over the Hartford convention, delivered a reply to Hayne
for the supremacy of the Constitution and the national character of the
=The War on the United States Bank.=--If events forced the issue of
nationalism and nullification upon Jackson, the same could not be said
in operation very long, however, before it aroused bitter opposition,
especially in the South and the West. Its notes drove out of circulation
the paper currency of unsound banks chartered by the states, to the
their support at Washington. To all Jackson's followers it was "an
insidious money power." One of them openly denounced it as an
institution designed "to strengthen the arm of wealth and counterpoise
constitutionality was in doubt and alleged that it had failed to
by the government, not a private concern endowed with special privileges
subject, leaving the decision, however, to "an enlightened people and
Moved by this frank hostility and anxious for the future, the bank
before the expiration of its life. Clay, with his eye upon the
application. Congress, deeply impressed by his leadership, passed the
His response was an instant veto. The battle was on and it raged with
In his veto message, Jackson attacked the bank as unconstitutional and
even hinted at corruption. He refused to assent to the proposition that
decision in the McCulloch case. "Each public officer," he argued, "who
takes an oath to support the Constitution, swears that he will support
it as he understands it, not as it is understood by others."
Not satisfied with his veto and his declaration against the bank,
"assumed upon himself authority and power not conferred by the
of the states. The state legislatures, under a decision rendered by the
issue bills of credit or make anything but gold and silver coin legal
adopted the practice of depositing huge amounts of government funds in
these banks, not forgetting to render favors to those institutions which
time. In 1837, partially, though by no means entirely, as a result of
disastrous panics which it ever experienced.
very clear problem--one of destruction. Other questions were not so
simple, particularly the subject of federal appropriations in aid of
government assistance in such matters, but his administration was
appropriating public funds for public roads, advancing as their reason
the argument that the Constitution authorized no such laws. Jackson,
puzzled by the clamor on both sides, followed their example without
strongly deprecated attacks by local interests on the federal treasury.
people, freed and instructed to ride rough shod over Congress and even
peace such lofty notions of executive prerogative. The entire body of
posts in the government, he treated with scant courtesy, preferring
stairs arrangements, became known as "the kitchen cabinet." Under the
leadership of a silent, astute, and resourceful politician, Amos
Kendall, this informal gathering of the faithful both gave and carried
out decrees and orders, communicating the President's lightest wish or
strictest command to the uttermost part of the country. Resolutely and
able to tear the censure from the records. When Chief Justice Marshall
THE RISE OF THE WHIGS
so radical, and conduct so high-handed could not fail to arouse against
Jackson a deep and exasperated opposition. The truth is the conduct of
of the country. It was accompanied by conditions similar to those which
unstable and irritating as the worthless notes of revolutionary days,
flooded the country, hindering the easy transaction of business. The use
of federal funds for internal improvements, so vital to the exchange of
commodities which is the very life of industry, was blocked by executive
vetoes. The Supreme Court, which, under Marshall, had held refractory
rights judges, deliberately selected by Jackson for the bench, began to
sap and undermine the rulings of Marshall. The protective tariff, under
Pennsylvania, and the wool, flax, and hemp farms of the West had
flourished, had received a severe blow in the compromise of 1833 which
party, casting aside the old and reputable name of Republican, boldly
chose for its title the term "Democrat," throwing down the gauntlet to
every conservative who doubted the omniscience of the people. All these
things worked together to evoke an opposition that was sharp and
determined.
leadership fell to Henry Clay, a son of Kentucky, rather than to Daniel
Webster of Massachusetts. Like Jackson, Clay was born in a home haunted
rose to eminence in the profession of law. Without the martial gifts or
the martial spirit of Jackson, he slipped more easily into the social
habits of the East at the same time that he retained his hold on the
He was thus a leader well fitted to gather the forces of opposition
into union against Jackson.
Around Clay's standard assembled a motley collection, representing every
species of political opinion, united by one tie only--hatred for "Old
Hickory." Nullifiers and less strenuous advocates of states' rights were
yoked with nationalists of Webster's school; ardent protectionists were
bound together with equally ardent free traders, all fraternizing in one
supporters of Clay. The platform of the party, however, embraced all the
tyranny; and denunciation of the spoils system. Though Jackson was
easily victorious in 1832, the popular vote cast for Clay should have
superb confidence. At the end of his second term he insisted on
voters, but packed with his office holders and friends, he nominated
Martin Van Buren of New York. Once more he proved his strength by
carrying the country for the Democrats. With a fine flourish, he
applause and tears of his devotees, to the Hermitage, his home in
Tennessee.
which struck the country with terrible force in the following summer.
Among the contributory causes of this crisis, no doubt, were the
destruction of the bank and the issuance of the "specie circular" of
1836 which required the purchasers of public lands to pay for them in
coin, instead of the paper notes of state banks. Whatever the dominating
cause, the ruin was widespread. Bank after bank went under; boom towns
in the West collapsed; Eastern mills shut down; and working people in
the industrial centers, starving from unemployment, begged for relief.
Van Buren braved the storm, offering no measure of reform or assistance
to the distracted people. He did seek security for government funds by
depositaries for public funds, in several leading cities. This plan was
finally accepted by Congress in 1840.
Had Van Buren been a captivating figure he might have lived down the
being a favorite with the populace. Though a man of many talents, he
owed his position to the quiet and adept management of Jackson rather
than to his own personal qualities. The men of the frontier did not care
for him. They suspected that he ate from "gold plate" and they could not
Democratic party, remembering Jackson's wishes, renominated him
unanimously in 1840 and saw him go down to utter defeat.
Republicans, now known as Whigs--a title taken from the party of
improvements, but a military hero, General William Henry Harrison, a man
rewarded by a grateful people with a seat in Congress. Then he retired
held to be a son of the South and the West. Like Jackson he was a
military hero, a lesser light, but still a light. Like Old Hickory he
rode into office on a tide of popular feeling against an Eastern man
accused of being something of an aristocrat. His personal popularity was
platform or declare their belief in anything. When some Democrat
asserted that Harrison was a backwoodsman whose sole wants were a jug of
insult but as proof positive that Harrison deserved the votes of Jackson
Buren got only sixty.
=Harrison and Tyler.=--The Hero of Tippecanoe was not long to enjoy the
He was none too strong at best and he took a deep cold on the day of his
inauguration. Between driving out Democrats and appeasing Whigs, he fell
Harrison's successor, John Tyler, the Vice President, whom the Whigs had
anything else, though he was not partisan enough to please anybody. The
United States Bank. The Democrats stormed at him for refusing, until
near the end of his term, to sanction the annexation of Texas, which had
marked by unseemly wrangling, produced only two measures of importance.
The Whigs, flushed by victory, with the aid of a few protectionist
Democrats, enacted, in 1842, a new tariff law destroying the compromise
the days of nullification. The distinguished leader of the Whigs, Daniel
Webster, as Secretary of State, in negotiation with Lord Ashburton
representing Great Britain, settled the long-standing dispute between
the two countries over the Maine boundary. A year after closing this
chapter in American diplomacy, Webster withdrew to private life, leaving
the President to endure alone the buffets of political fortune.
To the end, the Whigs regarded Tyler as a traitor to their cause; but
the judgment of history is that it was a case of the biter bitten. They
had nominated him for the vice presidency as a man of views acceptable
public life again until the days of secession, when he espoused the
a new cause--slavery--was returned to power under James K. Polk, a
friend of the General from Tennessee. A few grains of sand were to run
scattered as the Federalists had been more than a generation before.
THE INTERACTION OF AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN OPINION
=Democracy in England and France.=--During the period of Jacksonian
Democracy, as in all epochs of ferment, there was a close relation
between the thought of the New World and the Old. In England, the
successes of the American experiment were used as arguments in favor of
overthrowing the aristocracy which George III had manipulated with such
the other hand, conservatives like Chancellor Kent, the stout opponent
of manhood suffrage in New York, cited the riots of the British working
classes as a warning against admitting the same classes to a share in
the government of the United States. Along with the agitation of opinion
went epoch-making events. In 1832, the year of Jackson's second
conferred the ballot--not on workingmen as yet--but on mill owners and
shopkeepers whom the landlords regarded with genuine horror. The initial
step was thus taken in breaking down the privileges of the landed
aristocracy and the rich merchants of England.
family, restored to the throne of France by the allied powers after
their victory over Napoleon in 1815, had embarked upon a policy of
arbitrary government. To use the familiar phrase, they had learned
Revolution, to stifle the press, restrict the suffrage, and restore the
equally zealous opposition and in 1830 he was overthrown. The popular
party, under the leadership of Lafayette, established, not a republic as
some of the radicals had hoped, but a "liberal" middle-class monarchy
toward democracy. The mayor, aldermen, and citizens of New York City
joined in a great parade to celebrate the fall of the Bourbons. Mingled
with cheers for the new order in France were hurrahs for "the people's
own, Andrew Jackson, the Hero of New Orleans and President of the United
=European Interest in America.=--To the older and more settled
Europeans, the democratic experiment in America was either a menace or
an inspiration. Conservatives viewed it with anxiety; liberals with
optimism. Far-sighted leaders could see that the tide of democracy was
that had advanced furthest along the new course was the place in which
to find arguments for and against proposals that Europe should make
traveler there began to visit the United States the thoughtful observer
bent on finding out what manner of nation this was springing up in the
wilderness. Those who looked with sympathy upon the growing popular
forces of England and France found in the United States, in spite of
liberal of mildly democratic sympathies, made a journey to this country
in 1831; he described in a very remarkable volume, _Democracy in
America_, the grand experiment as he saw it. On the whole he was
convinced. After examining with a critical eye the life and labor of the
nation, he came to the conclusion that democracy with all its faults was
both inevitable and successful. Slavery he thought was a painful
contrast to the other features of American life, and he foresaw what
proved to be the irrepressible conflict over it. He believed that
arts, self-government on a grand scale. The absence of a leisure class,
devoted to no calling or profession, merely enjoying the refinements of
necessary virtue in the republic. "Amongst a democratic people where
there is no hereditary wealth, every man works to earn a living, or has
worked, or is born of parents who have worked. A notion of labor is
therefore presented to the mind on every side as the necessary, natural,
and honest condition of human existence." It was this notion of a
government in the hands of people who labored that struck the French
=Harriet Martineau's Visit to America.=--This phase of American life
also profoundly impressed the brilliant English writer, Harriet
Martineau. She saw all parts of the country, the homes of the rich and
the log cabins of the frontier; she traveled in stagecoaches, canal
boats, and on horseback; and visited sessions of Congress and auctions
thing that left the deepest mark on her mind was the solidarity of the
people in one great political body. "However various may be the tribes
language, however servile or noble their employments, however exalted or
despised their state, all are declared to be bound together by equal
political obligations.... In that self-governing country all are held to
have an equal interest in the principles of its institutions and to be
bound in equal duty to watch their workings." Miss Martineau was also
contrasted the United States favorably with England where the tillers of
the soil were either tenants or laborers for wages.
=Adverse Criticism.=--By no means all observers and writers were
convinced that America was a success. The fastidious traveler, Mrs.
Trollope, who thought the English system of church and state was ideal,
saw in the United States only roughness and ignorance. She lamented the
"total and universal want of manners both in males and females," adding
there was "no charm, no grace in their conversation." She found
everywhere a lack of reverence for kings, learning, and rank. Other
critics were even more savage. The editor of the _Foreign Quarterly_
and lame, so full of sores and ulcers that her best friends turn from
_Edinburgh Review_, was never tired of trying his caustic wit at the
expense of America. "Their Franklins and Washingtons and all the other
sciences, for the arts, for literature, or even for the statesmanlike
studies of politics or political economy.... In the four quarters of the
he added, forgetting by whose authority slavery was introduced and
Some Americans, while resenting the hasty and often superficial
judgments of European writers, winced under their satire and took
thought about certain particulars in the indictments brought against
gave little heed to carping critics who saw the flaws and not the
achievements of our country--critics who were in fact less interested in
America than in preventing the rise and growth of democracy in Europe.
J.S. Bassett, _Life of Andrew Jackson_.
J.W. Burgess, _The Middle Period_.
II.
C.H. Peck, _The Jacksonian Epoch_.
=Questions=
2. On what grounds were the limitations defended? Attacked?
5. Contrast the Presidents of the old and the new generations.
6. Account for the unpopularity of John Adams' administration.
9. Explain the growth of Southern opposition to the tariff.
Carolina.
11. State Jackson's views and tell the outcome of the controversy.
mean?
14. Give some of the leading events in Clay's career.
15. How do you account for the triumph of Harrison in 1840?
were some of the European writers on American affairs?
=Research Topics=
Book_, pp. 320-329.
=Financial Aspects of the Bank Controversy.=--Dewey, _Financial History
of the United States_, Sections 86-87; Elson, _History of the United
States_, pp. 492-496.
=Jackson's View of the Union.=--See his proclamation on nullification in
Macdonald, pp. 333-340.
=The Webster-Hayne Debate.=--Analyze the arguments. Extensive extracts
=The Character of Jackson's Administration.=--Woodrow Wilson, _History
of the American People_, Vol. IV, pp. 1-87; Elson, pp. 498-501.
=The People in 1830.=--From contemporary writings in Hart, _American
History Told by Contemporaries_, Vol. III, pp. 509-530.
CHAPTER XII
THE MIDDLE BORDER AND THE GREAT WEST
before his mind's eye the great stretches of unoccupied lands between
the Appalachians and the Mississippi. He also had before him the history
of the English colonies, which told him of the two centuries required to
settle the seaboard region. To practical men, his prophecy did not seem
far wrong; but before the lapse of half that time there appeared beyond
the Mississippi a tier of new states, reaching from the Gulf of Mexico
to the southern boundary of Minnesota, and a new commonwealth on the
=Missouri.=--When the middle of the nineteenth century had been reached,
in Kentucky, had become the waterway for a vast empire. The center of
population of the United States had passed to the Ohio Valley. Missouri,
with its wide reaches of rich lands, low-lying, level, and fertile, well
florid orator announced, migratory slave owners were assured that their
property would be safe in Missouri. Along the western shore of the
Mississippi and on both banks of the Missouri to the uttermost limits of
the state, plantations tilled by bondmen spread out in broad expanses.
In the neighborhood of Jefferson City the slaves numbered more than a
Into this stream of migration from the planting South flowed another
current of land-tilling farmers; some from Kentucky, Tennessee, and
Mississippi, driven out by the onrush of the planters buying and
their own labor. In those regions the number of slaves seldom rose above
five or six per cent of the population. The old French post, St. Louis,
the river, grew into a thriving commercial city, including among its
seventy-five thousand inhabitants in 1850 nearly forty thousand
largest single element.
=Arkansas.=--Below Missouri lay the territory of Arkansas, which had
frontiersman fleeing from the advancing borders of farm and town. In
search of the life, wild and free, where the rifle supplied the game and
a few acres of ground the corn and potatoes, they had filtered into the
territory in an unending drift, "squatting" on the land. Without so much
as asking the leave of any government, territorial or national, they
claimed as their own the soil on which they first planted their feet.
Like the Cherokee Indians, whom they had as neighbors, whose very
restrictions of civilized life.
and Arkansas were well adapted to the cultivation of cotton and tobacco
and their sylvan peace was soon broken by an invasion of planters. The
newcomers, with their servile workers, spread upward in the valley
In time the slaves in the tier of counties against Louisiana ranged from
thirty to seventy per cent of the population. This marked the doom of
the small farmer, swept Arkansas into the main current of planting
=Michigan.=--In accordance with a well-established custom, a free state
of Michigan, a territory ten times the size of Connecticut, announced
commonwealth. All along the southern border the land had been occupied
largely by pioneers from New England, who built prim farmhouses and
city as the boats plying on the Great Lakes carried travelers, settlers,
were more than ninety thousand inhabitants in the territory; so it was
not without warrant that they clamored for statehood. Congress, busy as
ever with politics, delayed; and the inhabitants of Michigan, unable to
restrain their impatience, called a convention, drew up a constitution,
and started a lively quarrel with Ohio over the southern boundary. The
hand of Congress was now forced. Objections were made to the new
constitution on the ground that it gave the ballot to all free white
shorn of some of the land she claimed, came into the union in 1837.
=Wisconsin.=--Across Lake Michigan to the west lay the territory of
black-robed priests, prepared for sacrifice, even to death, the trappers
Menard--were the first white men to paddle their frail barks through the
and left traces of their work in the names of portages and little
years later to overthrow British dominion.
When, a generation afterward, the Stars and Stripes supplanted the Union
They were soon joined by hustling Yankee fur traders who did battle
forest trails and laid out the routes through lake and stream and over
portages for the settlers and their families from the states "back
miners from Kentucky, Tennessee, and Missouri crowding in to exploit the
lead ores of the northwest, some of them bringing slaves to work their
claims. Had it not been for the gold fever of 1849 that drew the
wielders of pick and shovel to the Far West, Wisconsin would early have
From a favorable point of vantage on Lake Michigan, the village of
for Eastern goods, grew into a thriving city. It claimed twenty thousand
inhabitants, when in 1848 Congress admitted Wisconsin to the union.
Already the Germans, Irish, and Scandinavians had found their way into
forests, building roads, transforming trails into highways, erecting
mills, and connecting streams with canals to make a network of routes
=Iowa and Minnesota.=--To the southwest of Wisconsin beyond the
Mississippi, where the tall grass of the prairies waved like the sea,
went northward; for freemen, unaccustomed to slavery and slave markets,
ingenuity they turned to trading on the river, building before 1836
True to their old traditions, they founded colleges and academies that
states from which they came. Prepared for self-government, the Iowans
laid siege to the door of Congress and were admitted to the union in
1846.
first white settlement was the little French village of Mendota. To the
people of the United States, the resources of the country were first
fur traders who were quick to take advantage of the opportunity to ply
their arts of hunting and bartering in fresh fields. In 1839 an
of advancing civilization. Within twenty years, the territory, boasting
plea was granted and Minnesota showed her gratitude three years later by
peril.
ON TO THE PACIFIC--TEXAS AND THE MEXICAN WAR
=The Uniformity of the Middle West.=--There was a certain monotony about
out like checkerboards into squares of forty, eighty, one hundred sixty,
or more acres, each the seat of a homestead. There was a striking
uniformity also about the endless succession of fertile fields spreading
were there to awaken curiosity about the region. No sonorous bells in
population was made up of plain farmers and their families engaged in
severe and unbroken labor, chopping down trees, draining fever-breeding
into whose frugal and industrious lives the later Irish and German
immigrants fitted, on the whole, with little friction. Even the Dutch
despair and hope were there, but all encompassed by the heavy tedium of
Daniel Boone had stirred the snug Americans of the seaboard to seek
their fortunes beyond the Appalachians, so now Kit Carson, James Bowie,
into a new land, only a part of which was under the American flag. The
setting for this new scene in the westward movement was thrown out in a
wide sweep from the headwaters of the Mississippi to the banks of the
Rio Grande; from the valleys of the Sabine and Red rivers to Montana and
the Pacific slope. In comparison with the middle border, this region
presented such startling diversities that only the eye of faith could
foresee the unifying power of nationalism binding its communities with
the older sections of the country. What contrasts indeed! The blue grass
region of Kentucky or the rich, black soil of Illinois--the painted
desert, the home of the sage brush and the coyote! The level prairies of
Iowa--the mighty Rockies shouldering themselves high against the
San Antonio, Tucson, and Santa Barbara! The little state of
Delaware--the empire of Texas, one hundred and twenty times its area!
civilization--fragments of four-and five-story dwellings, ruined dams,
plain.
and habits as those of the colonies on the coast had been. Americans of
English, Irish, and Scotch-Irish descent came as usual from the Eastern
first time came throngs of Scandinavians. Some were to make their homes
on quiet farms as the border advanced against the setting sun. Others
planters, keepers of lonely posts on the plain and the desert, stage
settlers came together in a single territory, there arose a mighty shout
for a position beside the staid commonwealths of the East and the South.
Statehood meant to the pioneers self-government, dignity, and the right
to dispose of land, minerals, and timber in their own way. In the quest
for this local autonomy there arose many a wordy contest in Congress,
a state when it gave promise of adding new congressmen of the "right
political persuasion," to use the current phrase.
=Southern Planters and Texas.=--While the farmers of the North found the
broad acres of the Western prairies stretching on before them apparently
Ever active in their search for new fields as they exhausted the virgin
soil of the older states, the restless subjects of King Cotton quickly
reached the frontier of Louisiana. There they paused; but only for a
and the Mexican republic to which it belonged extended to them a more
"peaceful penetration," the authorities at Mexico City opened wide the
doors and made large grants of land to American contractors, who agreed
to bring a number of families into Texas. The omnipresent Yankee, in the
person of Moses Austin of Connecticut, hearing of this good news in the
Southwest, obtained a grant in 1820 to settle three hundred Americans
and celebrated in the name given to the present capital of the state of
Texas. Within a decade some twenty thousand Americans had crossed the
border.
=Mexico Closes the Door.=--The government of Mexico, unaccustomed to
efforts were made by President Jackson to buy the territory for the
all American colonization schemes, canceled many of the land grants, put
were raised too late. A call for help ran through the western border of
Crockett, the noted frontiersman, bear hunter, and backwoods politician;
his name; and Sam Houston, warrior and pioneer, rushed to the aid of
impatient at the formalities of international law, they soon made it
=The Independence of Texas Declared.=--Numbering only about one-fourth
of the population in Texas, they raised the standard of revolt in 1836
Americans from the slave states. Anticipating that the government of
president. A portion of the Texan soldiers took their stand in the
Alamo, an old Spanish mission in the cottonwood trees in the town of San
Antonio. Instead of obeying the order to blow up the mission and retire,
they held their ground until they were completely surrounded and cut off
from all help. Refusing to surrender, they fought to the bitter end, the
last man falling a victim to the sword. Vengeance was swift. Within
three months General Houston overwhelmed Santa Ana at the San Jacinto,
taking him prisoner of war and putting an end to all hopes for the
restoration of Mexican sovereignty over Texas.
The Lone Star Republic, with Houston at the head, then sought admission
required to bring it about appeared to be a treaty annexing Texas to the
a warm regard for General Houston and, with his usual sympathy for rough
cession of the coveted territory. When the Texans took matters into
approval of two-thirds of the Senators required for a treaty of
annexation. Cautious as well as impetuous, Jackson did not press the
=Northern Opposition to Annexation.=--All through the North the
opposition to annexation was clear and strong. Anti-slavery agitators
could hardly find words savage enough to express their feelings.
of aggression. I trust indeed that Providence will beat back and humble
prepared to seize on a neighboring territory for the end of extending
slavery? I ask whether as a people we can stand forth in the sight of
God, in the sight of nations, and adopt this atrocious policy? Sooner
perish! Sooner be our name blotted out from the record of nations!"
if Texas was brought into the union with slavery. John Quincy Adams
warned his countrymen that they were treading in the path of the
imperialism that had brought the nations of antiquity to judgment and
account changing public sentiment, blew hot and cold, losing the state
had to Spanish territory beyond the Sabine River.
=Annexation.=--The politicians were disposed to walk very warily. Van
fling of fortune carried into office as a nominal Whig, kept his mind
rest until the end of his administration was in sight. He then listened
with favor to the voice of the South. Calhoun stated what seemed to be a
convincing argument: All good Americans have their hearts set on the
preservation of the union; it will give a balance of power to the South
as against the North growing with incredible swiftness in wealth and
population. Tyler, impressed by the plea, appointed Calhoun to the
office of Secretary of State in 1844, authorizing him to negotiate the
treaty of annexation--a commission at once executed. This scheme was
blocked in the Senate where the necessary two-thirds vote could not be
secured. Balked but not defeated, the advocates of annexation drew up a
joint resolution which required only a majority vote in both houses,
and in February of the next year, just before Tyler gave way to Polk,
they pushed it through Congress. So Texas, amid the groans of Boston and
the hurrahs of Charleston, folded up her flag and came into the union.
=The Mexican War.=--The inevitable war with Mexico, foretold by the
all the lands down to the Rio Grande. The Mexicans placed the border of
Texas at the Nueces River and a line drawn thence in a northerly
direction. President Polk, accepting the Texan view of the controversy,
ordered General Zachary Taylor to move beyond the Nueces in defense of
invasion of their territory, was followed by an attack on our troops.
brushed aside the protests of those who deplored the conduct of the
government as wanton aggression on a weaker nation and granted money and
supplies to prosecute the war. The few Whigs in the House of
Representatives, who refused to vote in favor of taking up arms,
through the South and the West the war was popular. New England
grumbled, but gave loyal, if not enthusiastic, support to a conflict
precipitated by policies not of its own choosing. Only a handful of firm
objectors held out. James Russell Lowell, in his _Biglow Papers_, flung
scorn and sarcasm to the bitter end.
=The Outcome of the War.=--The foregone conclusion was soon reached.
General Taylor might have delivered the fatal thrust from northern
Mexico if politics had not intervened. Polk, anxious to avoid raising up
another military hero for the Whigs to nominate for President, decided
capital, Mexico City. The deed was done with speed and pomp and two
third candidate was made, John C. Fremont, who, in cooperation with
Stripes on the Pacific slope.
California, Arizona, New Mexico, and more--a domain greater in extent
the vanquished received fifteen million dollars in cash and the
cancellation of many claims held by American citizens. Five years later,
along the southern border of Arizona and New Mexico was secured on
payment of ten million dollars.
=General Taylor Elected President.=--The ink was hardly dry upon the
treaty that closed the war before "rough and ready" General Taylor, a
Whig," was put forward as the Whig candidate for President. He himself
had not voted for years and he was fairly innocent in matters political.
The tariff, the currency, and internal improvements, with a magnificent
gesture he referred to the people's representatives in Congress,
offering to enforce the laws as made, if elected. Clay's followers
mourned. Polk stormed but could not win even a renomination at the hands
celebrated for his laconic order, "Give 'em a little more grape, Captain
=Oregon.=--Closely associated in the popular mind with the contest about
the affairs of Texas was a dispute with Great Britain over the
possession of territory in Oregon. In their presidential campaign of
Forty or Fight." The last two slogans were founded on American
discoveries and explorations in the Far Northwest. Their appearance in
England, New York, and Pennsylvania combined, was at last receiving from
had long laid claim to Oregon and in 1818 they had agreed to occupy the
territory jointly--a contract which was renewed ten years later for an
indefinite period. Under this plan, citizens of both countries were free
traders and Canadian priests was enlarged by many new recruits, with
York merchant, sent out trappers and hunters who established a trading
post at Astoria in 1811. Some twenty years later, American
missionaries--among them two very remarkable men, Jason Lee and Marcus
Through news from the fur traders and missionaries, Eastern farmers
heard of the fertile lands awaiting their plows on the Pacific slope;
those with the pioneering spirit made ready to take possession of the
great expedition went overland. The way once broken, others followed
rapidly. As soon as a few settlements were well established, the
pioneers held a mass meeting and agreed upon a plan of government. "We,
the people of Oregon territory," runs the preamble to their compact,
"for the purposes of mutual protection and to secure peace and
regulations until such time as the United States of America extend their
jurisdiction over us." Thus self-government made its way across the
Rocky Mountains.
[Illustration: THE OREGON COUNTRY AND THE DISPUTED BOUNDARY]
_The Boundary Dispute with England Adjusted._--By this time it was
evident that the boundaries of Oregon must be fixed. Having made the
question an issue in his campaign, Polk, after his election in 1844,
pressed it upon the attention of the country. In his inaugural address
clear and unquestionable." This pretension Great Britain firmly
rejected, leaving the President a choice between war and compromise.
obtained a compromise. The British government, moved by a hint from the
American minister, offered a settlement which would fix the boundary at
Vancouver Island. Polk speedily chose this way out of the dilemma.
leaders, the advice was favorable to the plan. The treaty, duly drawn in
of the territory was admitted to the union as the state of Oregon,
=California.=--With the growth of the northwestern empire, dedicated by
nature to freedom, the planting interests might have been content, had
fortune not wrested from them the fair country of California. Upon this
soil seemed well suited to slavery and the planters expected to extend
155,000 square miles--about seventy times the size of the state of
Delaware. It could readily be divided into five or six large states, if
_Early American Relations with California._--Time and tide, it seems,
around the Horn. Daring skippers had sailed out of New England harbors
California, on to China and around the world, trading as they went and
stores, and rum in their wake. "Home from Californy!" rang the cry in
many a New England port as a good captain let go his anchor on his
return from the long trading voyage in the Pacific.
[Illustration: THE OVERLAND TRAILS]
_The Overland Trails._--Not to be outdone by the mariners of the deep,
western scouts searched for overland routes to the Pacific. Zebulon
Pike, explorer and pathfinder, by his expedition into the Southwest
Spain and had shown his countrymen how easy it was to reach Santa Fe
from the upper waters of the Arkansas River. Not long afterward, traders
laid open the route, making Franklin, Missouri, and later Fort
Leavenworth the starting point. Along the trail, once surveyed, poured
caravans heavily guarded by armed men against marauding Indians. Sand
many a band of wagoners to death; but the lure of the game and the
to be exchanged at Santa Fe for furs, Indian blankets, silver, and
Angeles. Thirteen years later Fremont made the first of his celebrated
the entire country in the Far West. In the wake of the pathfinders went
adventurers, settlers, and artisans. By 1847, more than one-fifth of the
inhabitants in the little post of two thousand on San Francisco Bay were
from the United States. The Mexican War, therefore, was not the
beginning but the end of the American conquest of California--a conquest
some mechanical pursuit.
secured by the friends of free soil, there came in 1848 the sudden
discovery of gold at Sutter's Mill in the Sacramento Valley. When this
exciting news reached the East, a mighty rush began to California, over
two years had passed, it is estimated that a hundred thousand people, in
doctors, lawyers, farmers, miners, and laborers from the four corners of
the earth.
[Illustration: _From an old print_
SAN FRANCISCO IN 1849]
of waiting for authority from Washington, the Californians held a
delegates brushed aside the plea that "the balance of power between the
and boldly made their request for inclusion among the United States.
President Taylor, though a Southern man, advised Congress to admit the
secession. Henry Clay, the great compromiser, came to the rescue and in
1850 California was admitted as a free state.
barren wastes, a religious sect, the Mormons, had planted a colony
of fortune. From Ohio they had migrated into Missouri where they were
Harried out of Missouri, they went into Illinois only to see their
director and prophet, Smith, first imprisoned by the authorities and
then shot by a mob. Having raised up a cloud of enemies on account of
both their religious faith and their practice of allowing a man to have
of Kansas--into the forlorn desert where the wicked would cease from
troubling and the weary could be at rest, as they read in the Bible. In
1847, Young, with a company of picked men, searched far and wide until
Illinois, he gathered up his followers, now numbering several thousand,
and in one mighty wagon caravan they all went to their distant haven.
_Brigham Young and His Economic System._--In Brigham Young the Mormons
had a leader of remarkable power who gave direction to the redemption of
the arid soil, the management of property, and the upbuilding of
co-operative lines, holding down the speculator and profiteer with one
the line between public and private interest. Land was given outright to
each family, but great care was exercised in the distribution so that
none should have great advantage over another. The purchase of supplies
and the sale of produce were carried on through a cooperative store, the
profits of which went to the common good. Encountering for the first
time in the history of the Anglo-Saxon race the problem of aridity, the
Mormons surmounted the most perplexing obstacles with astounding skill.
They built irrigation works by cooperative labor and granted water
rights to all families on equitable terms.
_The Growth of Industries._--Though farming long remained the major
every possible way, bent their efforts also to manufacturing and later
to mining. Their missionaries, who hunted in the highways and byways of
Europe for converts, never failed to stress the economic advantages of
company of woolen manufacturers to come with machinery and take the wool
want some men to start a furnace forthwith; the iron, coal, and molders
printing and writing paper to the Valley will be a blessing to
for defense against the Indians; and colonies were planted in the
the Mormons, estimated in 1895 that by the labor of their hands the
people had produced nearly half a billion dollars in wealth since the
coming of the vanguard.
remain undisturbed by outsiders was soon dashed to earth, for hundreds
settle among them. In 1850 the colony was so populous and prosperous
under the supervision of the federal government. Protests against
proclaimed it "the right and duty of Congress to prohibit in the
Territories those twin relics of barbarism, polygamy and slavery." In
kept their religious faith. Monuments to their early enterprise are seen
in the Temple and the Tabernacle, the irrigation works, and the great
wealth of the Church.
SUMMARY OF WESTERN DEVELOPMENT AND NATIONAL POLITICS
While the statesmen of the old generation were solving the problems of
their age, hunters, pioneers, and home seekers were preparing new
wealth. Between 1783 and 1829, eleven states were added to the original
Louisiana territory beyond the Mississippi. Here the process of
colonization was repeated. Hardy frontier people cut down the forests,
Like the seaboard colonists before them, they too cherished the spirit
Mississippi Valley could boast that one of its sons had been chosen for
the seat of power at Washington. Its democratic temper evoked a cordial
response in the towns of the East where the old aristocracy had been put
aside and artisans had been given the ballot.
he smote nullification in South Carolina, it gave him cordial support.
It approved his policy of parceling out government offices among party
workers--"the spoils system" in all its fullness. On only one point did
it really dissent. The West heartily favored internal improvements, the
appropriation of federal funds for highways, canals, and railways.
Jackson had misgivings on this question and awakened sharp criticism by
vetoing a road improvement bill.
From their point of vantage on the frontier, the pioneers pressed on
westward. They pushed into Texas, created a state, declared their
Mexico. They crossed the trackless plain and desert, laying out trails
to Santa Fe, to Oregon, and to California. They were upon the scene when
the Mexican War brought California under the Stars and Stripes. They had
"Fifty-Four Forty or Fight" forced a settlement of the Oregon boundary.
California and Oregon were already in the union when there arose the
Great Civil War testing whether this nation or any nation so conceived
and so dedicated could long endure.
=References=
K. Coman, _Economic Beginnings of the Far West_ (2 vols.).
R.S. Ripley, _The War with Mexico_.
W.C. Rives, _The United States and Mexico, 1821-48_ (2 vols.).
=Questions=
3. How did Mexico at first encourage American immigration?
4. What produced the revolution in Texas? Who led in it?
5. Narrate some of the leading events in the struggle over annexation to
into Texas.
11. Explain how California became a free state.
12. Describe the early economic policy of the Mormons.
=Research Topics=
=The Independence of Texas.=--McMaster, _History of the People of the
United States_, Vol. VI, pp. 251-270. Woodrow Wilson, _History of the
American People_, Vol. IV, pp. 102-126.
=The Santa Fe Trail.=--Coman, _Economic Beginnings_, Vol. II, pp. 75-93.
=Gold in California.=--McMaster, Vol. VII, pp. 585-614.
Houston, and David Crockett.
=The Romance of Western Exploration.=--J.G. Neihardt, _The Splendid
Wayfaring_. J.G. Neihardt, _The Song of Hugh Glass_.
PART V. SECTIONAL CONFLICT AND RECONSTRUCTION
THE RISE OF THE INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM
the Pacific Coast, the broad empire of Texas added to the planting
states, and the valley of the Willamette waving with wheat sown by
farmers from New England, he would have been more than fortified in his
more clearly written in the stars.
As the farmers from the Northwest and planters from the Southwest poured
by Jackson, grew stronger year by year. Opponents there were, no doubt,
Pierce, the Democratic candidate for President, carried every state in
the union except Massachusetts, Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee. This
victory, a triumph under ordinary circumstances, was all the more
significant in that Pierce was pitted against a hero of the Mexican War,
the new President calmly assured the planters that "the general
principle of reduction of duties with a view to revenue may now be
watchman in the night he called to the country: "All's well."
The party of Hamilton and Clay lay in the dust.
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
the symbol of defeat. Jackson destroyed the bank. Polk signed the tariff
bill of 1846 striking an effective blow at the principle of protection
successor was to approve a drastic step in the direction of free trade.
Nevertheless all these things left untouched the springs of power that
genius, and the free labor supply of Europe. Unseen by the thoughtless,
of statesmen, there was swiftly rising such a tide in the affairs of
Whitney combining wood and steel into a cotton gin, Fulton and Fitch
out the "iron horse" on "iron highways," Slater building spinning mills
in Pawtucket, Howe attaching the needle to the flying wheel, Morse
spanning a continent with the telegraph, Cyrus Field linking the markets
of the new world with the old along the bed of the Atlantic, McCormick
breaking the sickle under the reaper--these men and a thousand more were
destroying in a mighty revolution of industry the world of the
stagecoach and the tallow candle which Washington and Franklin had
inherited little changed from the age of Caesar. Whitney was to make
cotton king. Watt and Fulton were to make steel and steam masters of the
world. Agriculture was to fall behind in the race for supremacy.
=Industry Outstrips Planting.=--The story of invention, that tribute to
the triumph of mind over matter, fascinating as a romance, need not be
treated in detail here. The effects of invention on social and political
life, multitudinous and never-ending, form the very warp and woof of
American progress from the days of Andrew Jackson to the latest hour.
Neither the great civil conflict--the clash of two systems--nor the
the striking phases of industrialism.
First and foremost among them was the uprush of mills managed by
captains of industry and manned by labor drawn from farms, cities, and
foreign lands. For every planter who cleared a domain in the Southwest
magician of steam and steel who collected under his roof an army of free
In seven league boots this new giant strode ahead of the Southern giant.
progress, the value of domestic manufactures including mines and
fisheries rose from $1,019,106,616 to $1,900,000,000, an increase of
production of naval stores, rice, sugar, tobacco, and cotton, the
staples of the South, went only from $165,000,000, in round figures, to
land between the Atlantic and the Pacific; thus the course of economy
had been reversed in fifty years. Tested by figures of production, King
Cotton had shriveled by 1860 to a petty prince in comparison, for each
year the captains of industry turned out goods worth nearly twenty times
all the bales of cotton picked on Southern plantations. Iron, boots and
the entire cotton output.
=The Agrarian West Turns to Industry.=--Nor was this vast enterprise
confined to the old Northeast where, as Madison had sagely remarked,
commerce was early dominant. "Cincinnati," runs an official report in
1854, "appears to be a great central depot for ready-made clothing and
great trades of that city." There, wrote another traveler, "I heard the
crack of the cattle driver's whip and the hum of the factory: the West
and the East meeting." Louisville and St. Louis were already famous for
their clothing trades and the manufacture of cotton bagging. Five
hundred of the two thousand woolen mills in the country in 1860 were in
reached in value the cotton crop of 1850, the Ohio Valley furnished a
rapidly growing share. The old home of Jacksonian democracy, where
Federalists had been almost as scarce as monarchists, turned slowly
for domestic industry, espoused by Hamilton and defended by Clay.
=The Extension of Canals and Railways.=--As necessary to mechanical
industry as steel and steam power was the great market, spread over a
which began its career on the Hudson in 1807; by the canals, of which
which came into practical operation about 1830.
With sure instinct the Eastern manufacturer reached out for the markets
of the Northwest territory where free farmers were producing annually
systems--the Erie connecting New York City with the waterways of the
Great Lakes and the Pennsylvania chain linking Philadelphia with the
By 1860, New York had rail connections with Chicago and St. Louis, one
the Great Lakes, the other through Philadelphia and Pennsylvania and
across the rich wheat fields of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. Baltimore,
not to be outdone by her two rivals, reached out over the mountains for
In railway enterprise the South took more interest than in canals, and
drawing trade away from the Mississippi Valley, lines were built from
the Gulf to Chicago, the Illinois Central part of the project being a
monument to the zeal and industry of a Democrat, better known in
cotton and tobacco to the North or to seaports was of common concern to
Southern coast, linking Richmond, Charleston, and Savannah with the
Northern markets. Other lines struck inland from the coast, giving a
Nashville, and Montgomery. Nevertheless, in spite of this enterprise,
the mileage of all the Southern states in 1860 did not equal that of
Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois combined.
construction and operation of railways came such an accumulation of
capital in the Northern states as merchants of old never imagined. The
York, and Pennsylvania in 1860 had funds greater than the banks in all
the other states combined. New York City had become the money market of
America, the center to which industrial companies, railway promoters,
farmers, and planters turned for capital to initiate and carry on their
operations. The banks of Louisiana, South Carolina, Georgia, and
Virginia, it is true, had capital far in excess of the banks of the
Northwest; but still they were relatively small compared with the
financial institutions of the East.
=The Growth of the Industrial Population.=--A revolution of such
magnitude in industry, transport, and finance, overturning as it did the
agrarian civilization of the old Northwest and reaching out to the very
borders of the country, could not fail to bring in its train
Others require a fullness of time not yet reached to reveal their
complete significance. Outstanding among them was the growth of an
Virginian had foreseen, which flowed inevitably from public and private
[Illustration: LOWELL, MASSACHUSETTS, IN 1838, AN EARLY INDUSTRIAL
TOWN]
of the country sustained from manufactures. "This," runs the official
mariners, the employees of railroads, expresses, and steamboats; of
trades not classed as manufactures. It is safe to assume, then, that
one-third of the whole population is supported, directly, or indirectly,
by manufacturing industry." Taking, however, the number of persons
the astounding fact that the white laboring population, divorced from
recalled to what desperate straits the colonial leaders were put in
found partly in European conditions and partly in the cheapness of
them Chief Justice Ellsworth, went so far as to prophesy that white
labor would in time be so abundant that slavery would disappear as the
English government, ever furious and irrepressible, was increased in the
mid forties by an almost total failure of the potato crop, the main
to support a Protestant church. Tillers of the soil by necessity, they
whose claim to their estates rested upon the title of conquest and
confiscation. Intensely loyal to their race, the Irish were subjected in
all things to the Parliament at London, in which their small minority of
representatives had little influence save in holding a balance of power
irritation, the potato famine added physical distress beyond
of starvation lay dead by the hundreds, the relief which charity
afforded only bringing misery more sharply to the foreground. Those who
were fortunate enough to secure passage money sought escape to America.
In 1844 the total immigration into the United States was less than
canals and railways of those days were built by the labor of Irishmen.
such as was responsible for the coming of the Irish, may likewise be
time with results as pitiful, if less extensive. The calamity inflicted
by nature was followed shortly by another inflicted by the despotic
conduct of German kings and princes. In 1848 there had occurred
throughout Europe a popular uprising in behalf of republics and
democratic government. For a time it rode on a full tide of success.
government, and tyrannical ministers fled from their palaces. Then came
reaction. Those who had championed the popular cause were imprisoned,
shot, or driven out of the land. Men of attainments and distinction,
their adoption the spirit of liberty and democracy. In 1847 over fifty
thousand Germans came to America, the forerunners of a migration that
increased, almost steadily, for many years. The record of 1860 showed
that in the previous twenty years nearly a million and a half had found
and shops of the seacoast towns to the uttermost frontiers of Wisconsin
_The Labor of Women and Children._--If the industries, canals, and
railways of the country were largely manned by foreign labor, still
and boys and girls that laid the foundations of the textile industry in
America, foundations upon which the mechanical revolution was built. As
the wheel and loom were taken out of the homes to the factories operated
"The cotton manufacture alone employs six thousand persons in Lowell,"
until after the middle of the century that foreign lands proved to be
New England. It was then that the daughters of the Puritans, outdone by
the competition of foreign labor, both of men and women, left the
Pennsylvania and the growth of cities like Buffalo, Cincinnati,
Louisville, St. Louis, Detroit, and Chicago in the West, naturally
few mechanics, smiths, carpenters, and masons, widely scattered through
thousands of workers collected in one center in daily intercourse,
learning the power of cooperation and union.
Even before the coming of steam and machinery, in the "good old days" of
handicrafts, laborers in many trades--printers, shoemakers, carpenters,
for example--had begun to draw together in the towns for the advancement
milder laws. The shoemakers of Philadelphia, organized in 1794,
unions sprang up in all industrial centers and they led almost
As the thousands who were dependent upon their daily labor for their
continent, the local unions of craftsmen grew into national craft
including the plumbers, printers, mule spinners, iron molders, and stone
cutters. All over the North labor leaders arose--men unknown to general
history but forceful and resourceful characters who forged links binding
scattered and individual workers into a common brotherhood. An attempt
was even made in 1834 to federate all the crafts into a permanent
national organization; but it perished within three years through lack
of support. Half a century had to elapse before the American Federation
of Labor was to accomplish this task.
All the manifestations of the modern labor movement had appeared, in
political party. In every great city industrial disputes were a common
occurrence. The papers recorded about four hundred in two years,
field. The labor press seems to have begun with the founding of the
_Mechanics' Free Press_ in Philadelphia in 1828 and the establishment of
papers designed to weld together and advance the interests of particular
=Labor and Politics.=--As for the political program of labor, the main
planks were clear and specific: the abolition of imprisonment for debt,
manhood suffrage in states where property qualifications still
prevailed, free and universal education, laws protecting the safety and
health of workers in mills and factories, abolition of lotteries, repeal
of laws requiring militia service, and free land in the West.
and none other." In Newcastle county, Delaware, the association of
made by the rich and of course for the rich." Here and there an
extremist went to the length of advocating an equal division of wealth
among all the people--the crudest kind of communism.
Agitation of this character produced in labor circles profound distrust
of both Whigs and Democrats who talked principally about tariffs and
banks; it resulted in attempts to found independent labor parties. In
the hands of the working people, where it properly belongs,"
triumphantly exclaimed the _Mechanics' Free Press_ of Philadelphia in
ranks. The old party leaders, particularly of Tammany Hall, the
Democratic party organization in New York City, offered concessions to
labor in return for votes. Newspapers unsparingly denounced "trade union
and some of them, deeming labor unrest the sour fruit of manhood
Labor leaders turned to a task which seemed more substantial and
definite purpose of raising wages and reducing hours.
=Southern Plans for Union with the West.=--It was long the design of
Southern statesmen like Calhoun to hold the West and the South together
simple. Both sections were agricultural--the producers of raw materials
tributaries formed the natural channel for the transportation of heavy
produce southward to the plantations and outward to Europe. Therefore,
one. By standing together in favor of low tariffs, they could buy their
manufactures cheaply in Europe and pay for them in cotton, tobacco, and
grain. The union of the two sections under Jackson's management seemed
perfect.
the ambitions of Southern statesmen. On the contrary, they also
The canals and railways were the physical signs of this economic union,
and the results, commercial and political, were soon evident. By the
middle of the century, Southern economists noted the change, one of
them, De Bow, lamenting that "the great cities of the North have
severally penetrated the interior with artificial lines until they have
produced on its borders." To this writer it was an astounding thing to
behold "the number of steamers that now descend the upper Mississippi
shipped to New York _via_ Chicago. The Illinois canal has not only swept
it is drawing the products of the upper Mississippi through the same
channel; thus depriving New Orleans and St. Louis of a rich portion of
their former trade."
If to any shippers the broad current of the great river sweeping down to
New Orleans offered easier means of physical communication to the sea
than the canals and railways, the difference could be overcome by the
produce buyers, in the first instance, and through them to the farmers
on the soil. The acute Southern observer just quoted, De Bow, admitted
with evident regret, in 1852, that "last autumn, the rich regions of
Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois were flooded with the local bank notes of
shipped by way of the canals in the spring.... These moneyed facilities
the West and the older home of Federalism in the East. The nationalism
to which Webster paid eloquent tribute became more and more real with
the passing of time. The self-sufficiency of the pioneer was broken down
as he began to watch the produce markets of New York and Philadelphia
where the prices of corn and hogs fixed his earnings for the year.
=The West and Manufactures.=--In addition to the commercial bonds
between the East and the West there was growing up a common interest in
manufactures. As skilled white labor increased in the Ohio Valley, the
that of the industrial East than like that of the planting South.
Moreover, the Western states produced some important raw materials for
American factories, which called for protection against foreign
competition, notably, wool, hemp, and flax. As the South had little or
no foreign competition in cotton and tobacco, the East could not offer
industries. With the West, however, it became possible to establish
reciprocity in tariffs; that is, for example, to trade a high rate on
wool for a high rate on textiles or iron.
=The South Dependent on the North.=--While East and West were drawing
turn more and more to Northern mills for their cloth, shoes, hats, hoes,
in exchange for their produce came overseas to Northern ports, whence
not carried to Europe in British bottoms, were transported by Northern
connected with the sale of Southern produce and the purchase of goods in
exchange passed into the hands of Northern merchants and bankers who,
planters who wanted to buy more land and more slaves on credit borrowed
heavily in the North where huge accumulations made the rates of interest
=The South Reckons the Cost of Economic Dependence.=--As Southern
dependence upon Northern capital became more and more marked, Southern
tribute-bearer to the manufacturer and financier. "The South,"
population of [Northern] merchants, shipowners, capitalists, and others
who, without claims on her progeny, drink up the life blood of her
trade.... Where goes the value of our labor but to those who, taking
turning our own capital to their profitable account, return laden with
Southern statisticians, not satisfied with generalities, attempted to
figure out how great was this tribute in dollars and cents. They
estimated that the planters annually lent to Northern merchants the full
reckoned that, if the South were to work up her own cotton, she would
realize from seventy to one hundred millions a year that otherwise went
some fifteen millions a year pleasure-seeking in the alluring cities and
summer resorts of the North.
program of economic measures demanded in the North was without exception
injurious to the corn and wheat producers of the West. Cheap labor
afforded by free immigration, a protective tariff raising prices of
manufactures for the tiller of the soil, ship subsidies increasing the
banking system giving strict national control over the currency as a
the South as contrary to the planting interest. They were constantly
compared with the restrictive measures by which Great Britain more than
so it can justify it again. "It is curious as it is melancholy and
distressing," came a broad hint from South Carolina, "to see how
striking is the analogy between the colonial vassalage to which the
England said to her American colonies: 'You shall not trade with the
country.' The manufacturing states say to their Southern colonies: 'You
produce.'" The conclusion was inexorable: either the South must control
the national government and its economic measures, or it must declare,
as America had done four score years before, its political and economic
independence. As Northern mills multiplied, as railways spun their
mighty web over the face of the North, and as accumulated capital rose
statesmen deepened into desperation.
=Efforts to Start Southern Industries Fail.=--A few of them, seeing the
and nullification this seemed the only remedy for the growing disparity
in the power of the two sections. Societies for the encouragement of
mechanical industries were formed, the investment of capital was sought,
and indeed a few mills were built on Southern soil. The results were
the enterprise for direction and the skilled labor were wanting. The
stream of European immigration flowed North and West, not South. The
Western land. To him slavery was a strange, if not a repelling,
inevitably agricultural. While agriculture predominated, leadership with
equal necessity fell to the planting interest. While the planting
=The Southern Theory of Sectionalism.=--In the opinion of the statesmen
who frankly represented the planting interest, the industrial system was
its deadly enemy. Their entire philosophy of American politics was
great geographical extent of our territory, and the diversity of the
happened that two great interests have sprung up, standing directly
opposed to each other. One of these consists of those manufactures which
the Northern and Middle states are capable of producing but which, owing
to the high price of labor and the high profits of capital in those
states, cannot hold competition with foreign manufactures without the
aid of bounties, directly or indirectly given, either by the general
government or by the state governments. The other of these interests
consists of the great agricultural staples of the Southern states which
in competition with those of the Northern and Middle states.... These
interests then stand diametrically and irreconcilably opposed to each
other. The interest, the pecuniary interest of the Northern
manufacturer, is directly promoted by every increase of the taxes
imposed upon Southern commerce; and it is unnecessary to add that the
taxes, at their pleasure, upon the foreign imports of the planter, no
characteristics of an absolute and unqualified despotism." The economic
soundness of this reasoning, a subject of interesting speculation for
the economist, is of little concern to the historian. The historical
point is that this opinion was widely held in the South and with the
progress of time became the prevailing doctrine of the planting
statesmen.
Their antagonism was deepened because they also became convinced, on
what grounds it is not necessary to inquire, that the leaders of the
industrial interest thus opposed to planting formed a consolidated
selfish and interested principles, whether in pursuit of the offices or
the bounties of the government, are ever more active and vigilant than
the great majority who act from disinterested and patriotic impulses.
Have we not witnessed it on this floor, sir? Who ever knew the tariff
The watchword is, stick together, right or wrong upon every question
such the combinations by which the manufacturing party, acting upon the
interests of some and the prejudices of others, have obtained a decided
Thus, as the Southern statesman would have it, the North, in matters
affecting national policies, was ruled by a "confederated interest"
which menaced the planting interest. As the former grew in magnitude and
attached to itself the free farmers of the West through channels of
trade and credit, it followed as night the day that in time the planters
would be overshadowed and at length overborne in the struggle of giants.
acted upon it.
=References=
J.R. Commons, _History of Labour in the United States_ (2 vols.).
E.R. Johnson, _American Railway Transportation_.
=Questions=
1. What signs pointed to a complete Democratic triumph in 1852?
3. Compare the planting system with the factory system.
4. In what sections did industry flourish before the Civil War? Why?
5. Show why transportation is so vital to modern industry and
agriculture.
7. Trace the steps in the rise of organized labor before 1860.
8. What political and economic reforms did labor demand?
9. Why did the East and the South seek closer ties with the West?
10. Describe the economic forces which were drawing the East and the
West together.
13. Show how economic conditions in the South were unfavorable to
14. Give the Southern explanation of the antagonism between the North
=Research Topics=
to be found in any good encyclopedia, especially the Britannica.
=River and Lake Commerce.=--Callender, _Economic History of the United
=Railways and Canals.=--Callender, pp. 326-344; 359-387. Coman,
_Industrial History of the United States_, pp. 216-225.
=The Growth of Industry, 1815-1840.=--Callender, pp. 459-471. From 1850
to 1860, Callender, pp. 471-486.
=Early Labor Conditions.=--Callender, pp. 701-718.
CHAPTER XIV
THE PLANTING SYSTEM AND NATIONAL POLITICS
James Madison, the father of the federal Constitution, after he had
watched for many days the battle royal in the national convention of
1787, exclaimed that the contest was not between the large and the small
states, but between the commercial North and the planting South. From
the inauguration of Washington to the election of Lincoln the sectional
conflict, discerned by this penetrating thinker, exercised a profound
"era of good feeling" when the Jeffersonian Republicans adopted
Federalist policies; it flamed up in the contest between the Democrats
culminated in the Civil War.
Georgia. New Jersey had more than Delaware or Tennessee, indeed nearly
as many as both combined. All told, however, there were only about forty
thousand in the North as against nearly seven hundred thousand in the
There was, in the North, a steadily growing moral sentiment against the
system. Massachusetts abandoned it in 1780. In the same year,
there had been only a handful, Connecticut with a few thousand
domestics, and New Jersey early followed these examples. New York, in
1799, declared that all children born of slaves after July 4 of that
it swept away the last vestiges of slavery. So with the passing of the
generation that had framed the Constitution, chattel servitude
disappeared in the commercial states, leaving behind only such
=The Growth of Northern Sentiment against Slavery.=--In both sections of
philosophically inclined, a strong opposition to slavery on moral as
well as economic grounds. In the constitutional convention of 1787,
Gouverneur Morris had vigorously condemned it and proposed that the
whole country should bear the cost of abolishing it. About the same time
a society for promoting the abolition of slavery, under the presidency
attention be given to the emancipation of "those unhappy men who alone
in this land of freedom are degraded into perpetual bondage." When
Congress, acting on the recommendations of President Jefferson, provided
as well as the trade. Later, colonization societies were formed to
organization.
The anti-slavery sentiment of which these were the signs was
nevertheless confined to narrow circles and bore no trace of bitterness.
"We consider slavery your calamity, not your crime," wrote a
distinguished Boston clergyman to his Southern brethren, "and we will
the public lands shall be appropriated to this object.... I deprecate
everything which sows discord and exasperating sectional animosities."
new kind of anti-slavery doctrine--the dogmatism of the abolition
emancipation. If a date must be fixed for its appearance, the year 1831
anti-slavery paper, _The Liberator_. With singleness of purpose and
utter contempt for all opposing opinions and arguments, he pursued his
course of passionate denunciation. He apologized for having ever
"assented to the popular but pernicious doctrine of gradual abolition."
He chose for his motto: "Immediate and unconditional emancipation!" He
as justice"; that he would not "think or speak or write with
moderation." Then he flung out his defiant call: "I am in earnest--I
will not equivocate--I will not excuse--I will not retreat a single
     'Such is the vow I take, so help me God.'"
make every statue leap from its pedestal," he soon learned how alive the
stoned in the street and hissed from the platform. Their meeting places
mob behind prison bars. Lovejoy, a publisher in Alton, Illinois, for his
willingness to give abolition a fair hearing, was brutally murdered; his
printing press was broken to pieces as a warning to all those who
disturbed the nation's peace of mind. The South, doubly frightened by a
women, and children, closed all discussion of slavery in that section.
concession nor compromise."
As the opposition hardened, the anti-slavery agitation gathered in force
Lowell, looking upon the espousal of a great cause as the noblest aim of
his art, ridiculed and excoriated bondage in the South. Those
abolitionists, not gifted as speakers or writers, signed petitions
relentless campaign, to carry a motion rescinding the rule.
How deep was the impression made upon the country by this agitation for
immediate and unconditional emancipation cannot be measured. If the
popular vote for those candidates who opposed not slavery, but its
indeed. In 1844, the Free Soil candidate, Birney, polled 62,000 votes
the pleas of the abolitionist found no widespread response among the
people. Yet the agitation undoubtedly ran deeper than the ballot box.
before Wendell Phillips, the young Boston lawyer who cast aside his
wife. Jefferson, looking into the future, condemned the system by which
he also lived, saying: "Can the liberties of a nation be thought secure
when we have removed their only firm basis, a conviction in the minds of
violated but with His wrath? Indeed I tremble for my country when I
reflect that God is just; that His justice cannot sleep forever." Nor
opinion. They accepted in 1787 the Ordinance which excluded slavery from
the Northwest territory forever and also the Missouri Compromise, which
rather than abolishing, the system of chattel servitude. The invention
of the cotton gin and textile machinery created a market for cotton
the small farmers were driven steadily from the seaboard into the
uplands or to the Northwest.
three millions in 1850. At the same time slavery itself was transformed.
Instead of the homestead where the same family of masters kept the same
families of slaves from generation to generation, came the plantation
system of the Far South and Southwest where masters were ever moving and
regular and highly profitable business.
=Slavery Defended as a Positive Good.=--As the abolition agitation
increased and the planting system expanded, apologies for slavery became
fainter and fainter in the South. Then apologies were superseded by
in a famous speech in the Senate in 1837, sounded the new note by
reasoning was as follows: in every civilized society one portion of the
community must live on the labor of another; learning, science, and the
arts are built upon leisure; the African slave, kindly treated by his
master and mistress and looked after in his old age, is better off than
the free laborers of Europe; and under the slave system conflicts
respect, he concluded, "will become more and more manifest, if left
eagerly seized by the planters as they came more and more to overshadow
the small farmers of the South and as they beheld the menace of
abolition growing upon the horizon. It formed, as they viewed matters, a
moral defense for their labor system--sound, logical, invincible. It
warranted them in drawing together for the protection of an institution
Though in 1850 the slave owners were only about three hundred and fifty
had an influence all out of proportion to their numbers. They were knit
together by the bonds of a common interest. They had leisure and wealth.
South and largely in the North, they had the press, the schools, and the
pulpits on their side. They formed, as it were, a mighty union for the
protection and advancement of their common cause. Aided by those
through thick and thin, the planters became a power in the federal
This jubilant Southern claim was conceded by William H. Seward, a
action and management of the concern.... The slaveholders, contributing
in an overwhelming proportion to the strength of the Democratic party,
slaveholding class has become the governing power in each of the
slaveholding states and it practically chooses thirty of the sixty-two
members of the Senate, ninety of the two hundred and thirty-three
two hundred and ninety-five electors of President and Vice-President of
the United States." Then he considered the slave power in the Supreme
Court. "That tribunal," he exclaimed, "consists of a chief justice and
carefully considered by the President and Senate when he was appointed.
Not one of them was found wanting in soundness of politics, according to
the slaveholder's exposition of the Constitution." Such was the Northern
view of the planting interest that, from the arena of national politics,
=National Aspects of Slavery.=--It may be asked why it was that slavery,
drawn into the current of national affairs. The answer is simple. There
territories, the District of Columbia, the forts and other property
slavery should exist in the places subject to its jurisdiction. Upon
Congress was also conferred the power of admitting new states; whenever
a territory asked for admission, the issue could be raised as to whether
slavery should be sanctioned or excluded. Under the Constitution,
provision was made for the return of runaway slaves; Congress had the
through the mails. Finally citizens had the right of petition; it
inheres in all free government and it is expressly guaranteed by the
abolitionists to present to Congress their petitions, even if they asked
for something which it had no right to grant. It was thus impossible,
There were, in the second place, economic reasons why slavery was
inevitably drawn into the national sphere. It was the basis of the
planting system which had direct commercial relations with the North and
European countries; it was affected by federal laws respecting tariffs,
bounties, ship subsidies, banking, and kindred matters. The planters of
were binding the West to the East and turning the traffic from New
=Slavery and the Territories--the Missouri Compromise (1820).=--Though
not be done. By 1818 slavery had become so entrenched and the
anti-slavery sentiment so strong, that Missouri's quest for admission
brought both houses of Congress into a deadlock that was broken only by
compromise. The South, having half the Senators, could prevent the
the House of Representatives, could keep Missouri with slavery out of
resort. Maine, separated from the parent state of Massachusetts, was
brought into the union with freedom and Missouri with bondage. At the
same time it was agreed that the remainder of the vast Louisiana
territory north of the parallel of 36 o 30' should be, like the old
Northwest, forever free; while the southern portion was left to slavery.
In reality this was an immense gain for liberty. The area dedicated to
slavery in the territories.
[Illustration: THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE]
Southern leaders, the annexation of Texas and the conquest of Mexico
meant renewed security to the planting interest against the increasing
into four slave states. The new territories secured by the treaty of
each new free soil state knocked for admission into the union, the
South could demand as the price of its consent a new slave state. No
conquest of Mexico, slavery and King Cotton triumphant--secure for all
convinced that the Southern prophecy was true. Abolitionists and
moderate opponents of slavery alike were in despair. Texas, they
lamented, would fasten slavery upon the country forevermore. "No living
It so happened, however, that the events which, it was thought, would
secure slavery let loose a storm against it. A sign appeared first on
that day, David Wilmot, a Democrat from Pennsylvania, introduced into
the House of Representatives a resolution to the effect that, as an
from the republic of Mexico, slavery should be forever excluded from
every part of it. "The Wilmot Proviso," as the resolution was popularly
Representatives, Robert Toombs of Georgia boldly declared: "In the
the time had come to join her sister states "in resisting the
application of the Wilmot Proviso at any and all hazards." A conference,
assembled at Jackson, Mississippi, in the autumn of 1849, called a
general convention of Southern states to meet at Nashville the following
summer. The avowed purpose was to arrest "the course of aggression" and,
if that was not possible, to provide "in the last resort for their
afford protection to their liberties and rights." States that had
spurned South Carolina's plea for nullification in 1832 responded to
=The Great Debate of 1850.=--The temper of the country was white hot
for the last time three heroic figures: Webster from the North, Calhoun
these three had been leaders of men. All had grown old and gray in
service. Calhoun was already broken in health and in a few months was to
be borne from the political arena forever. Clay and Webster had but two
a mighty effort to solve the slavery problem. On January 29, 1850, Clay
offered to the Senate a compromise granting concessions to both sides;
for a union of hearts through mutual sacrifices. Calhoun relentlessly
demanded the full measure of justice for the South: equal rights in the
territories bought by common blood; the return of runaway slaves as
Webster, in his notable "Seventh of March speech," condemned the Wilmot
denounced the abolitionists, and made a final plea for the Constitution,
Whittier the poem, "Ichabod," deploring the fall of the mighty one whom
he thought lost to all sense of faith and honor.
=The Terms of the Compromise of 1850.=--When the debates were closed,
Fillmore, who had taken office two months before on the death of Zachary
Taylor. By these acts the boundaries of Texas were adjusted and the
territory of New Mexico created, subject to the provision that all or
slavery, thus repudiating the Wilmot Proviso without guaranteeing
slavery to the planters. California was admitted as a free state under a
constitution in which the people of the territory had themselves
prohibited slavery.
The slave trade was abolished in the District of Columbia, but slavery
to anti-slavery sentiment was more than offset by a fugitive slave law,
drastic in spirit and in letter. It placed the enforcement of its terms
in the hands of federal officers appointed from Washington and so
removed it from the control of authorities locally elected. It provided
that masters or their agents, on filing claims in due form, might
summarily remove their escaped slaves without affording their "alleged
fugitives" the right of trial by jury, the right to witness, the right
to offer any testimony in evidence. Finally, to "put teeth" into the
act, heavy penalties were prescribed for all who obstructed or assisted
of 1850.
[Illustration: AN OLD CARTOON REPRESENTING WEBSTER "STEALING CLAY'S
THUNDER"]
of slavery agitation and wanted peace. Both parties, Whigs and
Compromise. The Democrats, with Franklin Pierce as their leader, swept
Whigs had staked their hopes. Even Webster, broken with grief at his
failure to receive the nomination, advised his friends to vote for
The verdict of the voters would seem to indicate that for the time
everybody, save a handful of disgruntled agitators, looked upon Clay's
settlement as the last word. "The people, especially the business men of
the country," says Elson, "were utterly weary of the agitation and they
gave their suffrages to the party that promised them rest." The Free
Soil party, condemning slavery as "a sin against God and a crime against
man," and advocating freedom for the territories, failed to carry a
earlier--156,000 as against nearly 3,000,000, the combined vote of the
Pierce, surrounded in his cabinet by strong Southern sympathizers, could
promise to put an end to slavery agitation and to crush the abolition
movement in the bud.
=Anti-slavery Agitation Continued.=--The promise was more difficult to
fulfill than to utter. In fact, the vigorous execution of one measure
included in the Compromise--the fugitive slave law--only made matters
worse. Designed as security for the planters, it proved a powerful
instrument in their undoing. Slavery five hundred miles away on a
Louisiana plantation was so remote from the North that only the
strongest imagination could maintain a constant rage against it. "Slave
and villages of the wide-stretching farm lands of the North was another
system. Law-abiding business men, mechanics, farmers, and women, when
perhaps for years, torn away by federal officers and carried back to
Canada, and trusted friends of freedom maintained "underground stations"
where fugitives were concealed in the daytime between their long night
journeys. Funds were raised and secret agents sent into the South to
help negroes to flee. One negro woman, Harriet Tubman, "the Moses of her
people," with headquarters at Philadelphia, is accredited with nineteen
invasions into slave territory and the emancipation of three hundred
underground operator, Calvin Fairbank, spent nearly twenty years in
prison for aiding fugitives from justice. Yet perils and prisons did not
stay those determined men and women who, in obedience to their
consciences, set themselves to this lawless work.
[Illustration: HARRIET BEECHER STOWE]
From thrilling stories of adventure along the underground railways came
"Uncle Tom's Cabin," published two years after the Compromise of 1850.
Her stirring tale set forth the worst features of slavery in vivid word
pictures that caught and held the attention of millions of readers.
city and town throughout the North. Topsy, Little Eva, Uncle Tom, the
with his baying blood hounds, became living specters in many a home that
slavery agitation."
=Repeal of the Missouri Compromise.=--To practical men, after all, the
"rub-a-dub" agitation of a few abolitionists, an occasional riot over
fugitive slaves, and the vogue of a popular novel seemed of slight or
transient importance. They could point with satisfaction to the election
returns of 1852; but their very security was founded upon shifting
sands. The magnificent triumph of the pro-slavery Democrats in 1852
brought a turn in affairs that destroyed the foundations under their
opponents, they now dared to repeal the Missouri Compromise. The leader
in this fateful enterprise was Stephen A. Douglas, Senator from
organization of territorial government in the regions west of Iowa and
Missouri.
Douglas, like Clay and Webster before him, was consumed by a strong
win the support of the South. This he undoubtedly sought to do when he
introduced on January 4, 1854, a bill organizing the Nebraska territory
on the principle of the Compromise of 1850; namely, that the people in
the territory might themselves decide whether they would have slavery or
not. Unwittingly the avalanche was started.
After a stormy debate, in which important amendments were forced on
they, or territories organized out of them, could come into the union as
states "with or without slavery as their constitutions may prescribe at
the time of their admission." Not content with this, the law went on to
declare the Missouri Compromise null and void as being inconsistent with
the principle of non-intervention by Congress with slavery in the states
and territories. Thus by a single blow the very heart of the continent,
dedicated to freedom by solemn agreement, was thrown open to slavery. A
settlement, he was rapidly disillusioned. A blast of rage, terrific in
its fury, swept from Maine to Iowa. Staid old Boston hanged him in
effigy with an inscription--"Stephen A. Douglas, author of the infamous
Nebraska bill: the Benedict Arnold of 1854." City after city burned him
coast to Chicago in the light of the fires. Thousands of Whigs and
Free-soil Democrats deserted their parties which had sanctioned or at
least tolerated the Kansas-Nebraska Bill, declaring that the startling
measure showed an evident resolve on the part of the planters to rule
the whole country. A gage of defiance was thrown down to the
abolitionists. An issue was set even for the moderate and timid who had
been unmoved by the agitation over slavery in the Far South. That issue
was whether slavery was to be confined within its existing boundaries or
be allowed to spread without interference, thereby placing the free
states in the minority and surrendering the federal government wholly to
the slave power.
in Congress, many Northern Whigs and Democrats had come to the
conclusion that a new party dedicated to freedom in the territories must
follow the repeal of the Missouri Compromise. Several places claim to be
yield it to Wisconsin. At Ripon in that state, a mass meeting of Whigs
and Democrats assembled in February, 1854, and resolved to form a new
party if the Kansas-Nebraska Bill should pass. At a second meeting a
fusion committee representing Whigs, Free Soilers, and Democrats was
formed and the name Republican--the name of Jefferson's old party--was
committees were organized.
contest. After a preliminary conference in Pittsburgh in February, they
opposing the extension of slavery to the territories. John C. Fremont,
the distinguished explorer, was named for the presidency. The results
of the preceding election. Prominent men like Longfellow, Washington
Irving, William Cullen Bryant, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and George William
James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, was elected by a majority of 174 to 114
electoral votes.
[Illustration: SLAVE AND FREE SOIL ON EVE OF CIVIL WAR]
=The Dred Scott Decision (1857).=--In his inaugural, Buchanan vaguely
hinted that in a forthcoming decision the Supreme Court would settle one
old state of Missouri. He brought suit for his liberty on the ground
that his residence in the free territory made him free. This raised the
question whether the law of Congress prohibiting slavery north of 36 o
30' was authorized by the federal Constitution or not. The Court might
the territory, he became a slave again in Missouri by virtue of the law
that Scott had not been free anywhere and that, besides, the Missouri
Compromise violated the Constitution and was null and void.
all had no power to abolish slavery in the territories. Under the decree
of the highest court in the land, that could be done only by an
amendment to the Constitution which required a two-thirds vote in
amendment was obviously impossible--the Southern states were too
numerous; but the Republicans were not daunted. "We know," said Lincoln,
"the Court that made it has often overruled its own decisions and we
shall do what we can to have it overrule this." Legislatures of Northern
platform of 1860 characterized the dogma that the Constitution carried
slavery into the territories as "a dangerous political heresy at
variance with the explicit provisions of that instrument itself ... with
legislative and judicial precedent ... revolutionary in tendency and
=The Panic of 1857.=--In the midst of the acrimonious dispute over the
Dred Scott decision, came one of the worst business panics which ever
railroad corporations, including the Erie, Michigan Central, and the
Illinois Central, failed to meet their obligations; banks and insurance
companies, some of them the largest and strongest institutions in the
markets; manufacturing was paralyzed; tens of thousands of working
bread," were flung out. In New York, working men threatened to invade
than the proposal for a higher tariff to take the place of the law of
ascribed to the "Democratic assault on business." So an old issue was
campaign.
=The Lincoln-Douglas Debates.=--The following year the interest of the
whole country was drawn to a series of debates held in Illinois by
"a house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government
cannot endure permanently half slave and half free." At the same time he
had accused Douglas, Buchanan, and the Supreme Court of acting in
at each other, the candidates agreed to meet face to face and discuss
meetings in Illinois. Farmers deserted their plows, smiths their forges,
people of a territory from admission as a state if they saw fit to adopt
a constitution legalizing the ownership of slaves. He favored the
gradual abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia and the total
exclusion of it from the territories of the United States by act of
Moreover, he drove Douglas into a hole by asking how he squared
"squatter sovereignty" with the Dred Scott decision; how, in other
words, the people of a territory could abolish slavery when the Court
had declared that Congress, the superior power, could not do it under
the Constitution? To this baffling question Douglas lamely replied that
the inhabitants of a territory, by "unfriendly legislation," might make
property in slaves insecure and thus destroy the institution. This
that the Dred Scott decision settled the question of slavery in the
territories for all time. Douglas won the election to the Senate; but
Lincoln, lifted into national fame by the debates, beat him in the
by Lincoln, including his proposal to leave slavery untouched in the
states where it existed, was wholly unsatisfactory. One of them, a grim
and resolute man, inflamed by a hatred for slavery in itself, turned
action--action!" So spoke John Brown of New York. During the sanguinary
struggle in Kansas he hurried to the frontier, gun and dagger in hand,
funds from Northern friends, he gathered a small band of his followers
around him, saying to them: "If God be for us, who can be against us?"
He went into Virginia in the autumn of 1859, hoping, as he explained,
"to effect a mighty conquest even though it be like the last victory of
free the slaves whom he found, and called upon them to take up arms in
defense of their liberty. His was a hope as forlorn as it was desperate.
that the prisoner was simply a lunatic. "This is a beautiful country,"
said the stern old Brown glancing upward to the eternal hills on his way
journey. "So perish all such enemies of Virginia. All such enemies of
the Union. All such foes of the human race," solemnly announced the
one." Jefferson Davis saw in the affair "the invasion of a state by a
murderous gang of abolitionists bent on inciting slaves to murder
felon's death. Lincoln spoke of the raid as absurd, the deed of an
enthusiast who had brooded over the oppression of a people until he
leaders as a whole, the event was very embarrassing. They were taunted
by the Democrats with responsibility for the deed. Douglas declared his
"firm and deliberate conviction that the Harper's Ferry crime was the
Republicans felt called upon in 1860 to denounce Brown's raid "as among
the gravest of crimes."
=The Democrats Divided.=--When the Democratic convention met at
Charleston in the spring of 1860, a few months after Brown's execution,
it soon became clear that there was danger ahead. Between the extreme
slavery advocates of the Far South and the so-called pro-slavery
Democrats of the Douglas type, there was a chasm which no appeals to
party loyalty could bridge. As the spokesman of the West, Douglas knew
against an extension of slavery into the territories by act of Congress;
that squatter sovereignty was the mildest kind of compromise acceptable
to the farmers whose votes would determine the fate of the election.
Southern leaders would not accept his opinion. Yancey, speaking for
Alabama, refused to palter with any plan not built on the proposition
that slavery was in itself right. He taunted the Northern Democrats with
taking the view that slavery was wrong, but that they could not do
anything about it. That, he said, was the fatal error--the cause of all
discord, the source of "Black Republicanism," as well as squatter
sovereignty. The gauntlet was thus thrown down at the feet of the
Northern delegates: "You must not apologize for slavery; you must
declare it right; you must advocate its extension." The challenge, so
bluntly put, was as bluntly answered. "Gentlemen of the South,"
not do it."
balloted for the nomination of a candidate. Douglas, though in the lead,
could not get the two-thirds vote required for victory. For more than
fifty times the roll of the convention was called without a decision.
Then in sheer desperation the convention adjourned to meet later at
Baltimore. When the delegates again assembled, their passions ran as
unchanged. Uncompromising delegates from the South withdrew to Richmond,
a platform asserting the rights of slave owners in the territories and
the duty of the federal government to protect them. The delegates who
disrupted, a fragment of the former Whig party, known as the
national candidates: John Bell from Tennessee and Edward Everett from
Massachusetts. A melancholy interest attached to this assembly. It was
mainly composed of old men whose political views were those of Clay and
fellow citizens to "support the Constitution of the country, the union
votes.
=The Republican Convention.=--With the Whigs definitely forced into a
As the Democrats were split, the party that had led a forlorn hope four
years before was on the high road to success at last. New and powerful
enthusiastic foes of slavery. While still firm in their opposition to
slavery in the territories, the Republicans went on record in favor of a
homestead law granting free lands to settlers and approved customs
duties designed "to encourage the development of the industrial
which, according to the stenographic report of the convention, became
Having skillfully drawn a platform to unite the North in opposition to
these states were filled with settlers from Virginia, North Carolina,
and Kentucky who, even if they had no love for slavery, were no friends
Bank in Andrew Jackson's day, they were suspicious of men from the East.
Accordingly, they did not favor the candidacy of Seward, the leading
Republican statesman and "favorite son" of New York.
that Abraham Lincoln of Illinois was the most "available" candidate. He
heavily in the campaign in the Ohio Valley. He was a man of the soil,
in the fields and forests, celebrated far and wide as "honest Abe, the
abolitionist. He had come dangerously near to Seward's radicalism in his
"house-divided-against-itself" speech but he had never committed himself
slavery in the territories he opposed with all his strength. Of his
sincerity there could be no doubt. He was a speaker and writer of
the hearts and minds of those who heard him speak or read his printed
words. He had gone far enough in his opposition to slavery; but not too
far. He was the man of the hour! Amid lusty cheers from ten thousand
throats, Lincoln was nominated for the presidency by the Republicans. In
the ensuing election, he carried all the free states except New Jersey.
P.E. Chadwick, _Causes of the Civil War_ (American Nation Series).
W.E. Dodd, _Statesmen of the Old South_.
A.B. Hart, _Slavery and Abolition_ (American Nation Series).
1. Trace the decline of slavery in the North and explain it.
3. What was the effect of abolition agitation?
4. Why did anti-slavery sentiment practically disappear in the South?
6. Explain how slave owners became powerful in politics.
7. Why was it impossible to keep the slavery issue out of national
8. Give the leading steps in the long controversy over slavery in the
territories.
9. State the terms of the Compromise of 1850 and explain its failure.
10. What were the startling events between 1850 and 1860?
11. Account for the rise of the Republican party. What party had used
the title before?
13. What were some of the points brought out in the Lincoln-Douglas
15. What were the main planks in the Republican platform?
=The Extension of Cotton Planting.=--Callender, _Economic History of the
American History_, pp. 247-257.
of American History_, pp. 383-394. Narrative account in McMaster, Vol.
VIII, pp. 1-55; Elson, _History of the United States_, pp. 540-548.
192-231; Elson, pp. 571-582.
=The Dred Scott Case.=--McMaster, Vol. VIII, pp. 278-282. Compare the
Source Book_, pp. 405-420; Elson, pp. 595-598.
=The Lincoln-Douglas Debates.=--Analysis of original speeches in
=Biographical Studies.=--Calhoun, Clay, Webster, A.H. Stephens, Douglas,
Beecher Stowe.
CHAPTER XV
"The irrepressible conflict is about to be visited upon us through the
Black Republican nominee and his fanatical, diabolical Republican
party," ran an appeal to the voters of South Carolina during the
of the state, the answer should be a declaration of independence. In a
few days the suspense was over. The news of Lincoln's election came
speeding along the wires. Prepared for the event, the editor of the
Charleston _Mercury_ unfurled the flag of his state amid wild cheers
from an excited throng in the streets. Then he seized his pen and wrote:
initiated." The issue was submitted to the voters in the choice of
delegates to a state convention called to cast off the yoke of the
Constitution.
December and without a dissenting voice passed the ordinance of
roar of cannon carried the news to outlying counties, fireworks lighted
up the heavens, and champagne flowed. The crisis so long expected had
withdrawn from the union. In February, Texas followed. Virginia,
seceded in April; but fifty-five of the one hundred and forty-three
Virginia which Congress admitted to the union in 1863. In May, North
Carolina, Arkansas, and Tennessee announced their independence.
with the union, the seceding states denied every point in the Northern
carefully formulated by Webster and elaborated by Lincoln. According to
it, the union was older than the states; it was created before the
Declaration of Independence for the purpose of common defense. The
Constitution sealed it forever. The federal government was not a
creature of state governments. It was erected by the people and derived
Constitution, the people's government; made for the people; made by the
people; and answerable to the people. The people of the United States
have declared that this Constitution shall be the supreme law." When a
state questions the lawfulness of any act of the federal government, it
decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. The union of these
inaugural; the federal Constitution has no provision for its own
can lawfully get out of the union and acts of violence against the
which he believed himself bound to defend by his oath of office
"registered in heaven."
All this reasoning Southern statesmen utterly rejected. In their opinion
the thirteen original states won their independence as separate and
sovereign powers. The treaty of peace with Great Britain named them all
and acknowledged them "to be free, sovereign, and independent states."
The Articles of Confederation very explicitly declared that "each state
retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence." The Constitution
powers, each one of which ratified the instrument before it was put into
voluntarily they could leave it. Such was the constitutional doctrine of
Hayne, Calhoun, and Jefferson Davis. In seceding, the Southern states
had only to follow legal methods, and the transaction would be correct
in every particular. So conventions were summoned, elections were held,
and "sovereign assemblies of the people" set aside the Constitution in
the same manner as it had been ratified nearly four score years before.
letter of the law carried into effect.
a congress of delegates from the seceded states met at Montgomery,
selected, as provisional president, Jefferson Davis of Mississippi, a
of West Point, who had rendered distinguished service on the field of
battle in the Mexican War, in public office, and as a member of
Congress.
November; and the government under it went into effect the next year.
drafted at Philadelphia in 1787. It provided for a President, a Senate,
and a House of Representatives along almost identical lines. In the
The right to appropriate money for internal improvements was expressly
withheld; bounties were not to be granted from the treasury nor import
dignity of the state, if any might be bold enough to question it, was
safeguarded in the opening line by the declaration that each acted "in
its sovereign and independent character" in forming the Southern union.
=Financing the Confederacy.=--No government ever set out upon its career
with more perplexing tasks in front of it. The North had a monetary
system; the South had to create one. The North had a scheme of taxation
Confederacy expected to secure a large revenue from customs duties,
easily collected and little felt among the masses. To this expectation
the blockade of Southern ports inaugurated by Lincoln in April, 1861,
soon put an end. Following the precedent set by Congress under the
Articles of Confederation, the Southern Congress resorted to a direct
might have been foretold.
The Confederacy also sold bonds, the first issue bringing into the
sapping the foundations of a sound currency system. Large amounts of
bonds were sold overseas, commanding at first better terms than those
English lord and statesman buying with enthusiasm and confidence to
lament within a few years the proofs of his folly. The difficulties of
bringing through the blockade any supplies purchased by foreign bond
Confederacy back upon the device of paper money. In all approximately
one billion dollars streamed from the printing presses, to fall in value
at an alarming rate, reaching in January, 1863, the astounding figure of
used to prevent its depreciation, without result. To the issues of the
Confederate Congress were added untold millions poured out by the states
and by private banks.
=Human and Material Resources.=--When we measure strength for strength
in those signs of power--men, money, and supplies--it is difficult to
population of nine millions, nearly one-half servile, to be pitted
against twenty-two millions; a land without great industries to produce
war supplies and without vast capital to furnish war finances, joined in
battle with a nation already industrial and fortified by property worth
eleven billion dollars. Even after the Confederate Congress authorized
conscription in 1862, Southern man power, measured in numbers, was
How, therefore, could the Confederacy hope to sustain itself against
marshal?
=Southern Expectations.=--The answer to this question is to be found in
hoped, in vain, to carry the Confederacy up to the Ohio River; and, with
granary of the nation. In the second place, they reckoned upon a large
materials. They likewise expected to receive recognition and open aid
from European powers that looked with satisfaction upon the breakup of
their control over several staples so essential to Northern industry
states. "I firmly believe," wrote Senator Hammond, of South Carolina, in
1860, "that the slave-holding South is now the controlling power of the
world; that no other power would face us in hostility. Cotton, rice,
mange and starvation."
There were other grounds for confidence. Having seized all of the
federal military and naval supplies in the South, and having left the
national government weak in armed power during their possession of the
to put the finishing stroke to independence. "The greasy mechanics of
numbers they drew historic parallels. "Our fathers, a mere handful,
overcame the enormous power of Great Britain," a saying of ex-President
sympathizers were ready to let the Confederate states go in peace; that
Lincoln represented only a little more than one-third the voters of the
=Efforts at Compromise.=--Republican leaders, on reviewing the same
and politician who had done much to carry New York for Lincoln, proposed
a plan for extending the Missouri Compromise line to the Pacific.
terrible, was prepared to accept the offer; but Lincoln, remembering his
campaign pledges, stood firm as a rock against it. His followers in
Though unwilling to surrender his solemn promises respecting slavery in
the territories, Lincoln was prepared to give to Southern leaders a
indirectly with slavery in the states. Anxious to reassure the South on
this point, the Republicans in Congress proposed to write into the
Constitution a declaration that no amendment should ever be made
authorizing the abolition of or interference with slavery in any state.
The resolution, duly passed, was sent forth on March 4, 1861, with the
storm of war destroyed it. By the irony of fate the thirteenth amendment
THE WAR MEASURES OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
=Raising the Armies.=--The crisis at Fort Sumter, on April 12-14, 1861,
them. Lincoln's first call for volunteers, issued on April 15, 1861,
and prescribed their duty as the enforcement of the law against
combinations too powerful to be overcome by ordinary judicial process.
Bull Run on July 21 revealed the serious character of the task before
disappointing--ominous--for only about 87,000 soldiers were added to the
the national forces liable to military duty all able-bodied male
From the men enrolled were drawn by lot those destined to active
universal liability by excusing any person who found a substitute for
himself or paid into the war office a sum, not exceeding three hundred
dollars, to be fixed by general order. This provision, so crass and so
[Illustration: THE DRAFT RIOTS IN NEW YORK CITY]
The beginning of the drawings under the draft act in New York City, on
course of this uprising, draft headquarters were destroyed; the office
of the _Tribune_ was gutted; negroes were seized, hanged, and shot; the
mayor of the city was attacked; and regular battles were fought in the
until late the following Wednesday did enough troops arrive to restore
activities. At least a thousand people had been killed or wounded and
more than a million dollars' worth of damage done to property. The draft
temporarily interrupted by this outbreak was then resumed and carried
out without further trouble.
The results of the draft were in the end distinctly disappointing to the
and were able to pay $300 rather than serve exceeded all expectations.
well-to-do by allowing them to hire substitutes if they could find them.
With all this power in its hands the administration was able by January,
1865, to construct a union army that outnumbered the Confederates two to
one.
difficulties. The surplus in the treasury had been dissipated by 1861
meet the ordinary expenses of the government. Confronted by military and
the first year of the war to $1,153,000,000 in the last year, the
administration had to tap every available source of income. The duties
revenues and also meeting the most extravagant demands of the
manufacturers for protection. Direct taxes were imposed on the states
according to their respective populations, but the returns were
meager--all out of proportion to the irritation involved. Stamp taxes
were laid with a weight that, in ordinary times, would have drawn forth
opposition of ominous strength. The whole gamut of taxation was run.
Even a tax on incomes and gains by the year, the first in the history of
meet the rising expenditures. This currency issued at par on
began to decline until in the worst fortunes of 1864 one dollar in gold
blockading the ports of the Southern Confederacy. Later the blockade was
union. Vessels attempting to enter or leave these ports, if they
disregarded the warnings of a blockading ship, were to be captured and
brought as prizes to the nearest convenient port. To make the order
effective, immediate steps were taken to increase the naval forces,
depleted by neglect, until the entire coast line was patrolled with such
gantlet. The collision between the _Merrimac_ and the _Monitor_ in
March, 1862, sealed the fate of the Confederacy. The exploits of the
union navy are recorded in the falling export of cotton: $202,000,000 in
1860; $42,000,000 in 1861; and $4,000,000 in 1862.
negotiated but not paid off. Supplies could be purchased on credit but
from England or France. Unable to export their cotton, planters on the
seaboard burned it in what were called "fires of patriotism." In their
lurid light the fatal weakness of Southern economy stood revealed.
[Illustration: A BLOCKADE RUNNER]
became involved in many perplexing problems of diplomacy in Europe. The
Confederacy early turned to England and France for financial aid and for
crisis created by the cotton blockade would in time literally compel
Europe to intervene in order to get this essential staple. The crisis
came as he expected but not the result. Thousands of English textile
workers were thrown out of employment; and yet, while on the point of
starvation, they adopted resolutions favoring the North instead of
petitioning their government to aid the South by breaking the blockade.
With the ruling classes it was far otherwise. Napoleon III, the Emperor
of the French, was eager to help in disrupting the American republic; if
he could have won England's support, he would have carried out his
designs. As it turned out he found plenty of sympathy across the Channel
but not open and official cooperation. According to the eminent
historian, Rhodes, "four-fifths of the British House of Lords and most
members of the House of Commons were favorable to the Confederacy and
anxious for its triumph." Late in 1862 the British ministers, thus
Confederacy. Had it not been for their extreme caution, for the constant
and harassing criticism by English friends of the United States--like
John Bright--and for the victories of Vicksburg and Gettysburg, both
England and France would have doubtless declared the Confederacy to be
one of the independent powers of the earth.
took several steps that were in favor of the South. In proclaiming
neutrality, they early accepted the Confederates as "belligerents" and
accorded them the rights of people at war--a measure which aroused anger
Confederates taken in battle would have been regarded as "rebels" or
"traitors" to be hanged or shot. Napoleon III proposed to Russia in 1861
a coalition of powers against the North, only to meet a firm refusal.
The next year he suggested intervention to Great Britain, encountering
this time a conditional rejection of his plans. In 1863, not daunted by
rebuffs, he offered his services to Lincoln as a mediator, receiving in
reply a polite letter declining his proposal and a sharp resolution from
Congress suggesting that he attend to his own affairs.
friendliness to the Confederate agents. The British ministry, with
indifference if not connivance, permitted rams and ships to be built in
British docks and allowed them to escape to play havoc under the
Confederate flag with American commerce. One of them, the _Alabama_,
England, ran an extraordinary career and threatened to break the
blockade. The course followed by the British government, against the
protests of the American minister in London, was later regretted. By an
award of a tribunal of arbitration at Geneva in 1872, Great Britain was
by Confederate cruisers fitted out in England.
[Illustration: WILLIAM H. SEWARD]
contributed to the irritation between the two countries. Seward, the
not been for the moderation of Lincoln, he would have pursued a course
were severe in their attacks on England. Words were, on one occasion at
least, accompanied by an act savoring of open hostility. In November,
and Slidell, sent by President Davis to represent the Confederacy at
the United States conceded that it was in the wrong. It surrendered the
=Emancipation.=--Among the extreme war measures adopted by the Northern
government must be counted the emancipation of the slaves in the states
in arms against the union. This step was early and repeatedly suggested
drive the border states into secession, and that the Northern soldiers
had enlisted to save the union. Moreover, he had before him a solemn
intention of interfering with slavery.
soon found itself beaten back upon its course and out upon a new tack.
Before a year had elapsed, namely on April 10, 1862, Congress resolved
the Constitution had been re-read in the light of the Civil War. The
drift of public sentiment in the North was being revealed.
up his mind. By July of that year he had come to his great decision.
Near the end of that month he read to his cabinet the draft of a
September, the severe check administered to Lee at Antietam seemed to
given to the world announcing that, unless the states in arms returned
to the union by January 1, 1863, the fatal blow at their "peculiar
regard, and so on the date set the promise was fulfilled. The
proclamation was issued as a war measure, adopted by the President as
commander-in-chief of the armed forces, on grounds of military
to the whole country, Congress, in January, 1865, on the urgent
recommendation of Lincoln, transmitted to the states the thirteenth
amendment, abolishing slavery throughout the United States. By the end
itself; it did not fall; it was all free.
=The Restraint of Civil Liberty.=--As in all great wars, particularly
those in the nature of a civil strife, it was found necessary to use
hamper its action. Within two weeks of his first call for volunteers,
Lincoln empowered General Scott to suspend the writ of _habeas corpus_
along the line of march between Philadelphia and Washington and thus to
arrest and hold without interference from civil courts any one whom he
deemed a menace to the union. At a later date the area thus ruled by
military officers was extended by executive proclamation. By an act of
President's power, authorized him to suspend the writ throughout the
United States or in any part thereof. It also freed military officers
from the necessity of surrendering to civil courts persons arrested
protection of civil liberties, the _habeas corpus_, suspended throughout
strengthened by an act defining and punishing certain conspiracies,
passed on July 31, 1861--a measure which imposed heavy penalties on
execution of the law.
imprisoned, their papers suspended, and their newsboys locked up. Those
who organized "peace meetings" soon found themselves in the toils of the
law. Members of the Maryland legislature, the mayor of Baltimore, and
local editors suspected of entertaining secessionist opinions, were
imprisoned on military orders although charged with no offense, and were
farmer, too outspoken in his criticism of the government, found himself
to the border states where the spirit of secession was strong enough to
states up to the very boundaries of Canada. Zeal for the national cause,
to the normal course of civilized life, naturally aroused intense and
bitter hostility. Meetings of protest were held throughout the country.
Thirty-six members of the House of Representatives sought to put on
record their condemnation of the suspension of the _habeas corpus_ act,
Taney, before whom the case of a man arrested under the President's
had no power to suspend the writ of _habeas corpus_. In Congress and
out, Democrats, abolitionists, and champions of civil liberty denounced
Lincoln and his Cabinet in unsparing terms. Vallandigham, a Democratic
leader of Ohio, afterward banished to the South for his opposition to
side of China."
Sensitive to such stinging thrusts and no friend of wanton persecution,
Lincoln attempted to mitigate the rigors of the law by paroling many
political prisoners. The general policy, however, he defended in homely
desert?" he asked in a quiet way of some spokesmen for those who
protested against arresting people for "talking against the war." This
all measures necessary and proper to accomplish that purpose were
strategy followed by the commanders of the opposing forces are clear
campaign or, for that matter, the maneuvers of a single great battle.
The problem for the South was one of defense mainly, though even for
defense swift and paralyzing strokes at the North were later deemed
imperative measures. The problem of the North was, to put it baldly, one
Southern armies beaten on their own ground or worn down to exhaustion
there.
In the execution of this undertaking, geography, as usual, played a
overestimated. Victory in the West meant severing the Confederacy and
As it turned out, the Western forces accomplished their task first,
vindicating the military powers of union soldiers and shaking the
confidence of opposing commanders. In February, 1862, Grant captured
Fort Donelson on the Tennessee River, rallied wavering unionists in
Kentucky, forced the evacuation of Nashville, and opened the way for two
hundred miles into the Confederacy. At Shiloh, Murfreesboro, Vicksburg,
the hands of Southern commanders in the West, and the way prepared for
executed with needless severity in the autumn of 1864.
[Illustration: GENERAL ULYSSES S. GRANT]
[Illustration: GENERAL ROBERT E. LEE]
disasters. Far from capturing Richmond, they had been thrown on the
defensive. General after general--McClellan, Pope, Burnside, Hooker, and
Meade--was tried and found wanting. None of them could administer a
E. Lee, first at Antietam in September, 1862, and then at Gettysburg in
the next year, when General Grant, supplied with almost unlimited men
and munitions, began his irresistible hammering at Lee's army, did the
final phase of the war commence. The pitiless drive told at last.
General Lee, on April 9, 1865, seeing the futility of further conflict,
far from the capital of the Confederacy.
[Illustration: _Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
THE FEDERAL MILITARY HOSPITAL AT GETTYSBURG]
description. A judicial scrutiny of the war reveals his thought and
planning in every part of the varied activity that finally crowned
Seward, the Secretary of State, propose harsh and caustic measures
likely to draw England's sword into the scale? Lincoln counsels
moderation. He takes the irritating message and with his own hand
sick of carnage? Lincoln is always ready to listen and turns away only
the union. Is it high strategy of war, a question of the general best
fitted to win Gettysburg--Hooker, Sedgwick, or Meade? Lincoln goes in
person to the War Department in the dead of night to take counsel with
Is it a complaint from a citizen, deprived, as he believes, of his civil
Is a mother begging for the life of a son sentenced to be shot as a
deserter? Lincoln hears her petition, and grants it even against the
grandly waves aside their petty personalities and invites them to think
of the greater cause. Is it a question of securing votes to ratify the
thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery? Lincoln thinks it not beneath
York newspaper call him an ignorant Western boor? Lincoln's reply is a
the tongue in which they were written. These are tributes not only to
his mastery of the English language but also to his mastery of all those
Throughout the entire span of service, however, Lincoln was beset by
merciless critics. The fiery apostles of abolition accused him of
lashed out at every step he took. Even in his own party he found no
_imperator_--whichever you like; but how vain to have the power of a
put him aside in 1864 and place Chase in his chair. "I hope we may never
Wide were the dissensions in the North during that year and the
their old name and chose the simple title of the "Union party."
Moreover, they selected a Southern man, Andrew Johnson, of Tennessee, to
be associated with him as candidate for Vice President. This combination
the Northern Democrats boldly confronted with a platform declaring that
higher than the Constitution, the Constitution itself has been
disregarded in every part and public liberty and private right alike
trodden down ... justice, humanity, liberty, and public welfare demand
that immediate efforts be made for a cessation of hostilities, to the
states." It is true that the Democratic candidate, General McClellan,
he could not look his old comrades in the face and pronounce their
his works had gone forth. The response came, giving Lincoln 2,200,000
votes against 1,800,000 for his opponent. The bitter things said about
was struck down by the assassin's hand, he above all others in
Washington was planning measures of moderation and healing.
There is a strong and natural tendency on the part of writers to stress
the dramatic and heroic aspects of war; but the long judgment of history
requires us to include all other significant phases as well. Like every
great armed conflict, the Civil War outran the purposes of those who
took part in it. Waged over the nature of the union, it made a
revolution in the union, changing public policies and constitutional
doctrine of state sovereignty was laid to rest. Men might still speak of
but nullification and secession were destroyed. The nation was supreme.
=The Destruction of the Slave Power.=--Next to the vindication of
national supremacy was the destruction of the planting aristocracy of
the South--that great power which had furnished leadership of undoubted
ability and had so long contested with the industrial and commercial
interests of the North. The first paralyzing blow at the planters was
freedmen and excluding from public office the Confederate
leaders--driving from the work of reconstruction the finest talents of
the South. As if to add bitterness to gall and wormwood, the fourteenth
amendment forbade the United States or any state to pay any debts
slaves--plunging into utter bankruptcy the Southern financiers who had
stripped their section of capital to support their cause. So the
Southern planters found themselves excluded from public office and ruled
over by their former bondmen under the tutelage of Republican leaders.
worthless as waste paper. The South was subject to the North. That which
neither the Federalists nor the Whigs had been able to accomplish in the
realm of statecraft was accomplished on the field of battle.
of the federal government for manufactured goods at unrestricted prices
gave a stimulus to business which more than replaced the lost markets of
decade; while the number of persons employed almost doubled. There was
no doubt about the future of American industry.
=The Victory for the Protective Tariff.=--Moreover, it was henceforth to
protection had been on the defensive. The tariff act of 1857 imposed
duties so low as to presage a tariff for revenue only. The war changed
the debt remained and both interest and principal had to be paid.
Protective arguments based on economic reasoning were supported by a
plain necessity for revenue which admitted no dispute.
supply. The problem of manning industries became a pressing matter, and
adopted in 1864 it was declared "that foreign immigration, which in the
the increase of power to this nation--the asylum of the oppressed of all
problem, passed a measure of high significance, creating a bureau of
immigration, and authorizing a modified form of indentured labor, by
their passage over. Though the bill was soon repealed, the practice
authorized by it was long continued. The cheapness of the passage
shortened the term of service; but the principle was older than the
=The Homestead Act of 1862.=--In the immigration measure guaranteeing a
the Homestead Act of 1862 granting free lands to settlers. The Homestead
law they had resisted in a long and bitter congressional battle.
Naturally, they had not taken kindly to a scheme which lured men away
from the factories or enabled them to make unlimited demands for higher
wages as the price of remaining. Southern planters likewise had feared
to the overbalancing power of the North.
In spite of the opposition, supporters of a liberal land policy made
steady gains. Free-soil Democrats,--Jacksonian farmers and
agitation in season and out. More than once were they able to force a
homestead bill through the House of Representatives only to have it
blocked in the Senate where Southern interests were intrenched. Then,
vetoed the bill. Still the issue lived. The Republicans, strong among
they received their compensation in the contract labor law. In 1862
Congress provided for the free distribution of land in 160-acre lots
their serried lines of homesteads to the Rockies and beyond.
divided on the matter of free homesteads, the same could hardly be said
of internal improvements. The Western tiller of the soil was as eager
for some easy way of sending his produce to market as the manufacturer
was for the same means to transport his goods to the consumer on the
farm. While the Confederate leaders were writing into their
constitution a clause forbidding all appropriations for internal
improvements, the Republican leaders at Washington were planning such
expenditures from the treasury in the form of public land grants to
a century earlier.
=Sound Finance--National Banking.=--From Hamilton's day to Lincoln's,
business men in the East had contended for a sound system of national
currency. The experience of the states with paper money, painfully
impressive in the years before the framing of the Constitution, had been
convincing to those who understood the economy of business. The
Constitution, as we have seen, bore the signs of this experience. States
provision stood clear in the document; but judicial ingenuity had
sustained laws chartering banking companies and authorizing them to
In dealing with war finances, the Republicans attacked this ancient
evil. By act of Congress in 1864, they authorized a series of national
banks founded on the credit of government bonds and empowered to issue
authority of the states by means of a prohibitive tax. In this way, by
although it did not reestablish the United States Bank so hated by
=Destruction of States' Rights by Fourteenth Amendment.=--These acts and
others not cited here were measures of centralization and consolidation
at the expense of the powers and dignity of the states. They were all of
high import, but the crowning act of nationalism was the fourteenth
person of life, liberty or property without due process of law." The
immediate occasion, though not the actual cause of this provision, was
the need for protecting the rights of freedmen against hostile
prophesied in protests loud and long from every quarter of the
Democratic party, was the subjection of every act of state, municipal,
and county authorities to possible annulment by the Supreme Court at
attention of the courts; but thousands of state laws, municipal
ordinances, and acts of local authorities were set aside as null and
labor in bakeshops, and taxing corporations were in due time to be
annulled as conflicting with an amendment erroneously supposed to be
was conferred on the federal judiciary, the apex of which was the
Supreme Court at Washington. Thus the old federation of "independent
states," all equal in rights and dignity, each wearing the "jewel of
sovereignty" so celebrated in Southern oratory, had gone the way of all
=Theories about the Position of the Seceded States.=--On the morning of
April 9, 1865, when General Lee surrendered his army to General Grant,
had been for some time as to what should be done with the members of the
provinces" at the mercy of Congress, to be governed under such laws as
the war had been waged by the North on the theory that no state could
withdraw and had failed. The corollary of this latter line of argument
was simple: "The Southern states are still in the union and it is the
troops as soon as order is restored and the state governments ready to
=Lincoln's Proposal.=--Some such simple and conservative form of
except in slaves, to nearly all who had "directly or by implication
participated in the existing rebellion," on condition that they take an
oath of loyalty to the union. He then announced that when, in any of the
before secession and equal in number to one-tenth the votes cast in
1860, took the oath of allegiance, they should be permitted to
reestablish a state government. Such a government, he added, should be
federal Constitution. With reference to the status of the former slaves
Lincoln made it clear that, while their freedom must be recognized, he
would not object to any legislation "which may yet be consistent as a
landless, and homeless class."
Johnson, the Vice President, soon after taking office, proposed to
Democrat, was immediately charged by the Republicans with being too
opposition to his measures and policies in Congress grew in size and
House of Representatives in March, 1868, and his acquittal by the Senate
for conviction.
measures, the first of which became a law on March 2, 1867, betrayed an
animus not found anywhere in Lincoln's plans or Johnson's proclamations.
They laid off the ten states--the whole Confederacy with the exception
of Tennessee--still outside the pale, into five military districts, each
the commanding general to prepare a register of voters for the election
of delegates to conventions chosen for the purpose of drafting new
suggested, loyal persons duly qualified under the law existing before
in the establishment of the new order. Power was thus arbitrarily thrust
into the hands of the newly emancipated male negroes and the handful of
whites who could show a record of loyalty. That was not all. Each state
was, under the reconstruction acts, compelled to ratify the fourteenth
union.
The composition of the conventions thus authorized may be imagined.
"reconstruction." Undoubtedly many men of honor and fine intentions gave
unstinted service, but the results of their deliberations only
aggravated the open wound left by the war. Any number of political
states were one after another restored to the union by the grace of
Congress, the last one in 1870. Even this grudging concession of the
formalities of statehood did not mean a full restoration of honors and
privileges. The last soldier was not withdrawn from the last Southern
capital until 1877, and federal control over elections long remained as
a sign of congressional supremacy.
involved in restoring the seceded states to the union was the question
thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery had not touched it at all. It
declared bondmen free, but did nothing to provide them with work or
matters were left to the states, and the legislatures of some of them,
guise of vagrancy and apprentice laws. Such methods were in fact partly
Still no extensive effort was made to solve by law the economic problems
of the bondmen. Radical abolitionists had advocated that the slaves when
masters; but Congress steadily rejected the very idea of confiscation.
the Freedmen's Bureau to take care of refugees. It authorized the issue
of food and clothing to the destitute and the renting of abandoned and
certain other lands under federal control to former slaves at reasonable
rates. But the larger problem of the relation of the freedmen to the
Democrats, Congress did insist, however, on conferring upon the freedmen
certain rights by national law. These rights fell into broad divisions,
civil and political. By an act passed in 1866, Congress gave to former
slaves the rights of white citizens in the matter of making contracts,
property. As it was doubtful whether Congress had the power to enact
this law, there was passed and submitted to the states the fourteenth
amendment which gave citizenship to the freedmen, assured them of the
privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States, and declared
equal enjoyment of inns, theaters, public conveyances, and places of
amusement--a law later declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.
The matter of political rights was even more hotly contested; but the
radical Republicans, like Charles Sumner, asserted that civil rights
were not secure unless supported by the suffrage. In this same
men, leaving the women to take care of themselves. The amendment
the right to vote, its representation in Congress should be reduced in
the proportion such persons bore to the voting population.
This provision having failed to accomplish its purpose, the fifteenth
Congress enacted in 1870, 1872, and 1873 three drastic laws, sometimes
civil and military, in supervising elections in all parts of the Union.
legal decree to sweep away all its signs and badges, civil, social, and
political. Never, save perhaps in some of the civil conflicts of Greece
or Rome, had there occurred in the affairs of a nation a social
revolution so complete, so drastic, and far-reaching in its results.
SUMMARY OF THE SECTIONAL CONFLICT
Just as the United States, under the impetus of Western enterprise,
challenged by a fratricidal conflict between two sections. This storm
colonial times there had been a marked difference between the South and
system--the cultivation of tobacco, rice, cotton, and sugar cane--and in
the course of time slave labor became the foundation of the system. The
North, on the other hand, supplemented agriculture by commerce, trade,
and manufacturing. Slavery, though lawful, did not flourish there. An
This difference between the two sections, early noted by close
observers, was increased with the advent of the steam engine and the
factory system. Between 1815 and 1860 an industrial revolution took
place in the North. Its signs were gigantic factories, huge aggregations
of industrial workers, immense cities, a flourishing commerce, and
prosperous banks. Finding an unfavorable reception in the South, the new
railways New York, Boston, and Philadelphia were linked with the
wheatfields of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. A steel net wove North and
Northwest together. A commercial net supplemented it. Western trade was
Western enterprise.
In time, the industrial North and the planting South evolved different
ideas of political policy. The former looked with favor on protective
divided up into free homesteads for farmers. The South steadily swung
around to the opposite view. Its spokesmen came to regard most of these
policies as injurious to the planting interests.
The economic questions were all involved in a moral issue. The Northern
states, in which slavery was of slight consequence, had early abolished
uncompromising advocates of universal emancipation. Far and wide the
compromise. It took on the form of a tariff controversy and
question of slavery in the new territories was raised. Again
compromise--the great settlement of 1850--seemed to restore peace, only
to prove an illusion. A series of startling events swept the country
debates, John Brown's raid, the election of Lincoln, and secession.
The Civil War, lasting for four years, tested the strength of both North
and South, in leadership, in finance, in diplomatic skill, in material
resources, in industry, and in armed forces. By the blockade of Southern
ports, by an overwhelming weight of men and materials, and by relentless
hammering on the field of battle, the North was victorious.
to a man excluded from taking part in political affairs. The union was
counties, and cities was established by the fourteenth amendment. The
power and prestige of the federal government were enhanced beyond
imagination. The North was now free to pursue its economic policies: a
protective tariff, a national banking system, land grants for railways,
generation. Business enterprise was to take its place.
=References=
J.K. Hosmer, _The Appeal to Arms_ and _The Outcome of the Civil War_
J. Ropes, _History of the Civil War_ (best account of military
campaigns).
SOUTHERN ACCOUNTS
W.E. Dodd, _Jefferson Davis_.
Jefferson Davis, _Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government_.
E. Pollard, _The Lost Cause_.
A.H. Stephens, _The War between the States_.
nullification in 1832.
2. Compare the Northern and Southern views of the union.
5. Compare the resources of the two sections.
6. On what foundations did Southern hopes rest?
7. Describe the attempts at a peaceful settlement.
8. Compare the raising of armies for the Civil War with the methods
employed in the World War. (See below, chapter XXV.)
10. Explain why the blockade was such a deadly weapon.
12. Trace the growth of anti-slavery sentiment.
13. What measures were taken to restrain criticism of the government?
16. Compare Lincoln's plan of reconstruction with that adopted by
Congress.
=Research Topics=
=Was Secession Lawful?=--The Southern view by Jefferson Davis in
Harding, _Select Orations Illustrating American History_, pp. 364-369.
=Federal Legislative Measures.=--Prepare a table and brief digest of the
=Economic Aspects of the War.=--Coman, _Industrial History of the United
Chaps. XII and XIII. Tabulate the economic measures of Congress in
Macdonald.
affairs may assign campaigns to members of the class for study and
report. A briefer treatment in Elson, _History of the United States_,
=Biographical Studies.=--Lincoln, Davis, Lee, Grant, Sherman, and other
leaders in civil and military affairs, with reference to local "war
=English and French Opinion of the War.=--Rhodes, _History of the United
States_, Vol. IV, pp. 337-394.
=The North during the War.=--Rhodes, Vol. V, pp. 189-342.
=Reconstruction Measures.=--Macdonald, _Source Book_, pp. 500-511;
PART VI. NATIONAL GROWTH AND WORLD POLITICS
CHAPTER XVI
THE POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC EVOLUTION OF THE SOUTH
The outcome of the Civil War in the South was nothing short of a
revolution. The ruling class, the law, and the government of the old
order had been subverted. To political chaos was added the havoc wrought
in agriculture, business, and transportation by military operations. And
as if to fill the cup to the brim, the task of reconstruction was
committed to political leaders from another section of the country,
=A Ruling Class Disfranchised.=--As the sovereignty of the planters had
been the striking feature of the old regime, so their ruin was the
American Revolution was carried out by people experienced in the arts of
self-government, and at its close they were free to follow the general
course to which they had long been accustomed. The French Revolution
witnessed the overthrow of the clergy and the nobility; but middle
and wealth.
The Southern Revolution was unlike either of these cataclysms. It was
did not enfranchise a class that sought and understood power, but
bondmen who had played no part in the struggle. Moreover it struck down
excluded from state and federal offices, and the fourteenth amendment
authority of the United States and of the states were closed to every
Congress, as a state legislator, or as a state or federal officer, and
afterward engaged in "insurrection or rebellion," or "given aid and
supplemented by the reconstruction acts, laid under the ban most of the
talent, energy, and spirit of the South.
=The Condition of the State Governments.=--The legislative, executive,
control of former slaves, led principally by Northern adventurers or
Carolina bought clocks at $480 apiece and chandeliers at $650. To
the state rose from about $5,800,000 to $24,000,000, and millions of the
increase could not be accounted for by the authorities responsible for
it.
=Economic Ruin--Urban and Rural.=--No matter where Southern men turned
in 1865 they found devastation--in the towns, in the country, and along
and Augusta had suffered severely from fires. Charleston was described
by a visitor as "a city of ruins, of desolation, of vacant houses, of
rotten wharves, of deserted warehouses, of weed gardens, of miles of
young women are dressed in black! The flower of their proud aristocracy
is buried on scores of battle fields."
desolation equally widespread and equally pathetic. An English traveler
who made his way along the course of the Tennessee River in 1870 wrote:
houses, ruined bridges, mills, and factories ... and large tracts of
impassable, new tracks have been made through the woods and fields
confiscated by the federal authorities while the owner was in
Confederate service. Many more lay in waste. In the wake of the armies
the homes of rich and poor alike, if spared the torch, had been
despoiled of the stock and seeds necessary to renew agriculture.
investigations. One eloquent passage illustrates all the rest. From
Pocahontas to Decatur, Alabama, a distance of 114 miles, we are told,
gone, tracks grown up in weeds and bushes, not a saw mill near the line
twisted in such a manner as to require great labor to straighten and a
large portion of them requiring renewal."
=Capital and Credit Destroyed.=--The fluid capital of the South, money
and credit, was in the same prostrate condition as the material capital.
The Confederate currency, inflated to the bursting point, had utterly
aid of the Confederate cause "illegal and void." Millions of dollars
owed to Northern creditors before the war were overdue and payment was
pressed upon the debtors. Where such debts were secured by mortgages on
land, executions against the property could be obtained in federal
THE RESTORATION OF WHITE SUPREMACY
=Intimidation.=--In both politics and economics, the process of
reconstruction in the South was slow and arduous. The first battle in
the political contest for white supremacy was won outside the halls of
legislatures and the courts of law. It was waged, in the main, by secret
organizations, among which the Ku Klux Klan and the White Camelia were
was in origin a social club. According to its announcement, its objects
were "to protect the weak, the innocent, and the defenceless from the
indignities, wrongs, and outrages of the lawless, the violent, and the
and was ruled by a "Grand Wizard." Each state was a realm and each
county a province. In the secret orders there were enrolled over half a
The methods of the Ku Klux and the White Camelia were similar. Solemn
parades of masked men on horses decked in long robes were held,
sometimes in the daytime and sometimes at the dead of night. Notices
were sent to obnoxious persons warning them to stop certain practices.
emotion most commonly stirred. A horseman, at the witching hour of
midnight, would ride up to the house of some offender, lift his head
request that he hold it for a few minutes. Frequently violence was
employed either officially or unofficially by members of the Klan. Tar
and feathers were freely applied; the whip was sometimes laid on
unmercifully, and occasionally a brutal murder was committed. Often the
members were fired upon from bushes or behind trees, and swift
Congress forbade interference with electors or going in disguise for the
purpose of obstructing the exercise of the rights enjoyed under federal
In anticipation of such a step on the part of the federal government,
the Ku Klux was officially dissolved by the "Grand Wizard" in 1869.
Nevertheless, the local societies continued their organization and
says a Southern writer, "it is not easy to see what other course was
=The Struggle for the Ballot Box.=--The effects of intimidation were
laborious contest of his own and he saw no urgent reason why he should
existence of a threat, deterred thousands of ex-slaves from appearing at
the polls. Thus the whites steadily recovered their dominance. Nothing
supervision of elections and the Northern politicians protested against
the return of former Confederates to practical, if not official, power;
but all such opposition was like resistance to the course of nature.
=Amnesty for Southerners.=--The recovery of white supremacy in this way
was quickly felt in national councils. The Democratic party in the North
Republicans, anxious to heal the breach in American unity, sought to
Confederates was widely advocated. Yet it must be said that the struggle
for the removal of disabilities was stubborn and bitter. Lincoln, with
Union, on condition that they take an oath of loyalty; but Johnson,
vindictive toward Southern leaders and determined to make "treason
relentless in its pursuit of Confederates, pushed through the fourteenth
vain did men like Carl Schurz exhort their colleagues to crown their
victory in battle with a noble act of universal pardon and oblivion.
amnesty bill, it insisted on certain exceptions. Confederates who had
been members of Congress just before the war, or had served in other
high posts, civil or military, under the federal government, were still
excluded from important offices. Not until the summer of 1898, when the
war with Spain produced once more a union of hearts, did Congress relent
encouraged the Democrats to redouble their efforts all along the line.
In 1874 they captured the House of Representatives and declared war on
the "force bills." As a Republican Senate blocked immediate repeal, they
the effect that no troops should be used to sustain the Republican
government in Louisiana. The Senate rejected the proposal. A deadlock
Satisfied with the technical victory, the Democrats let the army bill
pass the next session, but kept up their fight on the force laws until
they wrung from President Hayes a measure forbidding the use of United
an end to the use of money for military control of elections. The
Court helped along the process of dissolution by declaring parts of the
laws invalid. In 1878 the Democrats even won a majority in the Senate
Confederate cause.
in the South, if not yet complete, was at least assured. Federal
authority over the polls, but their strength had been shorn by the
the "force bills" lapsed into desultory skirmishing. When in 1894 the
last fragment was swept away, the country took little note of the fact.
The only task that lay before the Southern leaders was to write in the
constitutions of their respective states the provisions of law which
would clinch the gains so far secured and establish white supremacy
beyond the reach of outside intervention.
this final step was given by the rise of the Populist movement in the
constitutions so constructed as to deprive negroes of the ballot by law.
Mississippi took the lead in 1890; South Carolina followed five years
The authors of these measures made no attempt to conceal their purposes.
"The intelligent white men of the South," said Governor Tillman, "intend
to govern here." The fifteenth amendment to the federal Constitution,
effective. The first and most easily administered was the ingenious
provision requiring each prospective voter to read a section of the
the election officers. As an alternative, the payment of taxes or the
for voting. Southern leaders, unwilling to disfranchise any of the poor
white men who had stood side by side with them "in the dark days of
reconstruction," also resorted to a famous provision known as "the
indicates that only about one negro out of every hundred adult males of
that race took part in elections. Thus was closed this chapter of
reconstruction.
unconstitutional; but the Court, usually on technical grounds, avoided
coming to a direct decision on the merits of the matter. In one case
political wrong, if done as alleged, by the people of a state and by the
main structure of disfranchisement unimpaired.
=Proposals to Reduce Southern Representation in Congress.=--These
provisions excluding thousands of male citizens from the ballot did not,
in express terms, deprive any one of the vote on account of race or
color. They did not, therefore, run counter to the letter of the
fifteenth amendment; but they did unquestionably make the states which
adopted them liable to the operations of the fourteenth amendment. The
latter very explicitly provides that whenever any state deprives adult
proportion which such number of disfranchised citizens bears to the
whole number of male citizens over twenty-one years of age.
Mindful of this provision, those who protested against disfranchisement
action by the political branches of the federal government as the
Supreme Court had suggested. The Republicans responded in their platform
of 1908 by condemning all devices designed to deprive any one of the
ballot for reasons of color alone; they demanded the enforcement in
Though victorious in the election, the Republicans refrained from
representation in the House. Southern leaders, while protesting against
threats in no way endangering the security of the measures by which
political reconstruction had been undone.
=The Solid South.=--Out of the thirty-year conflict against "carpet-bag
rule" there emerged what was long known as the "solid South"--a South
vote to a Republican candidate for President. Before the Civil War, the
example, the election of 1860. In all the fifteen slave states the
Arkansas--the combined vote against the representative of the extreme
Southern point of view, Breckinridge, constituted a safe majority. In
over Bell and Douglas was only 849 votes. Equally astounding to those
Constitution and silence on slavery. In every Southern state Bell's vote
than that received by Breckinridge; in Georgia, it was 42,000 against
51,000; in Louisiana, 20,000 against 22,000; in Mississippi, 25,000
against 40,000.
The effect of the Civil War upon these divisions was immediate and
dissent was silenced by war. Men who had been bitter opponents joined
remained side by side working against "Republican misrule and negro
domination." By 1890, after Northern supremacy was definitely broken,
=Dissent in the Solid South.=--Though every one grew accustomed to speak
number of Southern states there appeared from time to time a fairly
sharp differences of opinion. In some places, moreover, there grew up a
Republican minority of respectable size. For example, in Georgia, Mr.
Taft in 1908 polled 41,000 votes against 72,000 for Mr. Bryan; in North
Carolina, 114,000 against 136,000; in Tennessee, 118,000 against
135,000; in Kentucky, 235,000 against 244,000. In 1920, Senator Harding,
the Republican candidate, broke the record by carrying Tennessee as well
as Kentucky, Oklahoma, and Maryland.
=The Break-up of the Great Estates.=--In the dissolution of chattel
the small farm. The plantation was in fact founded on slavery. It was
planter, either by inclination or necessity, invested his surplus in
more land to add to his original domain. As his slaves increased in
number, he was forced to increase his acreage or sell them, and he
usually preferred the former, especially in the Far South. Still another
element favored the large estate. Slave labor quickly exhausted the soil
and of its own force compelled the cutting of the forests and the
extension of the area under cultivation. Finally, the planter took a
planters themselves were burdened with debts and handicapped by lack of
capital. Negroes commonly preferred tilling plots of their own, rented
planting system, reasserted itself. Before these forces the plantation
broke up. The small farm became the unit of cultivation in the South as
state south of the line of the Potomac and Ohio rivers, except in
Arkansas and Louisiana. From year to year the process of breaking up
continued, with all that it implied in the creation of land-owning
=The Diversification of Crops.=--No less significant was the concurrent
staples and "cotton was king." These were standard crops. The methods of
cultivation were simple and easily learned. They tested neither the
did not call for long-time investments of capital. After slavery was
character of the alluvial soil invited the exercise of more imagination.
Peaches, oranges, peanuts, and other fruits and vegetables were found to
gardeners. The South, which in planting days had relied so heavily upon
the Northwest for its foodstuffs, began to battle for independence.
Between 1880 and the close of the century the value of its farm crops
=The Industrial and Commercial Revolution.=--On top of the radical
changes in agriculture came an industrial and commercial revolution. The
been unfavorable to their development. Rivers that would have turned
millions of spindles tumbled unheeded to the seas. Coal and iron beds
lay unopened. Timber was largely sacrificed in clearing lands for
planting, or fell to earth in decay. Southern enterprise was consumed in
planting. Slavery kept out the white immigrants who might have supplied
STEEL MILLS--BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA]
After 1865, achievement and fortune no longer lay on the land alone. As
soon as the paralysis of the war was over, the South caught the
industrial spirit that had conquered feudal Europe and the agricultural
taken. Iron ore of every quality was found, the chief beds being in
Alabama, Arkansas, and Texas. Five important coal basins were uncovered:
in Virginia, North Carolina, the Appalachian chain from Maryland to
output of mineral wealth multiplied tenfold: from ten millions a year to
A SOUTHERN COTTON MILL IN A COTTON FIELD]
high rank. The development of Southern timber resources was in every
respect remarkable, particularly in Louisiana, Arkansas, and
primacy in lumber had passed from the Great Lakes region to the South.
Southern states. In 1880 they had one-fourth of the mills of the
Carolinas taking the lead by consuming more than one-third of their
entire cotton crop. Having both the raw materials and the power at hand,
they enjoyed many advantages over the New England rivals, and at the
opening of the new century were outstripping the latter in the
proportion of spindles annually put into operation. Moreover, the cotton
planters, finding a market at the neighboring mills, began to look
increase being in Texas. About 1898 there opened a period of
consolidation in which scores of short lines were united, mainly under
to the North and West. Thus Southern industries were given easy outlets
to the markets of the nation and brought within the main currents of
national business enterprise.
=The Social Effects of the Economic Changes.=--As long as the slave
system lasted and planting was the major interest, the South was bound
to be sectional in character. With slavery gone, crops diversified,
more assimilated to the system of the North. In this process several
In the first place we see the steady rise of the small farmer. Even in
the old days there had been a large class of white yeomen who owned no
severe handicaps. They found the fertile lands of the coast and river
valleys nearly all monopolized by planters, and they were by the force
of circumstances driven into the uplands where the soil was thin and the
their freeholds.
intelligent labor and intensive cultivation they were able to restore
much of the worn-out soil to its original fertility. In the meantime
became common for the sons of white farmers to enter the professions,
Thus a more democratic tone was given to the white society of the South.
was materially reduced. The energy of the agricultural population went
rise of small towns and villages which gave diversity to the life of the
South. Before 1860 it was possible to travel through endless stretches
trips to distant cities or abroad. Carpentry, bricklaying, and
blacksmithing were usually done by slaves skilled in simple handicrafts.
Supplies were bought wholesale. In this way there was little place in
plantation economy for villages and towns with their stores and
plantations had once stood. The skilled freedmen turned to agriculture
merchants and mechanics became an important element in the social
system. In the county seats, once dominated by the planters, business
and professional men assumed the leadership.
part of planting enterprise to business. Mr. Bruce, a Southern historian
of fine scholarship, has summed up this process in a single telling
paragraph: "The higher planting class that under the old system gave so
much distinction to rural life has, so far as it has survived at all,
the ruling class of the South the natural outcome of the great economic
revolution that followed the war."
attended by the growth of a population of industrial workers dependent
Davis was inaugurated President of the Southern Confederacy, there were
approximately only one hundred thousand persons employed in Southern
manufactures as against more than a million in Northern mills. Fifty
fifty thousand wage-earners. Necessarily this meant also a material
accompanied the rise of the textile industry in New England. In 1910,
New Orleans, Atlanta, Memphis, Nashville, and Houston stood in the same
writers boasted would never perplex the planting South, had come in full
force.
[Illustration: _Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
A GLIMPSE OF MEMPHIS, TENNESSEE]
=The Revolution in the Status of the Slaves.=--No part of Southern
masters of no trade and wholly inexperienced in the arts of self-help
to looking out for themselves. The plantation bell had called them to
labor and released them. Doles of food and clothing had been regularly
made in given quantities. They did not understand wages, ownership,
renting, contracts, mortgages, leases, bills, or accounts.
flee from the plantation to the nearest town or city, or to the distant
North, to seek a livelihood. Thousands of them chose this way,
them chose; but, as few masters had cash to dispense, the new relation
was much like the old, in fact. It was still one of barter. The planter
offered food, clothing, and shelter; the former slaves gave their labor
in return. That was the best that many of them could do.
A third course open to freedmen was that of renting from the former
master, paying him usually with a share of the produce of the land. This
land owners in time and it afforded an easier life, the renter being, to
a certain extent at least, master of his own hours of labor. The final
and most difficult path was that to ownership of land. Many a master
helped his former slaves to acquire small holdings by offering easy
terms. The more enterprising and the more fortunate who started life as
renters or wage-earners made their way upward to ownership in so many
In the meantime, the South, though relatively poor, made relatively
large expenditures for the education of the colored population. By the
opening of the twentieth century, facilities were provided for more than
one-half of the colored children of school age. While in many respects
this progress was disappointing, its significance, to be appreciated,
prevailed under slavery.
In spite of all that happened, however, the status of the negroes in the
South continued to give a peculiar character to that section of the
country. They were almost entirely excluded from the exercise of the
suffrage, especially in the Far South. Special rooms were set aside for
them at the railway stations and special cars on the railway lines. In
which their friends ascribed to discriminations against them in law and
in labor organizations and their critics ascribed to their lack of
opening of the twentieth century neither the hopes of the emancipators
nor the fears of their opponents were realized. The marks of the
society.
The situation, however, was by no means unchanging. On the contrary
negroes in the South had slowly declined. By 1900 they were in a
majority in only two states, South Carolina and Mississippi. In
Arkansas, Virginia, West Virginia, and North Carolina the proportion of
the white population was steadily growing. The colored migration
northward increased while the westward movement of white farmers which
colored quarters in some Northern cities were widely expanded, as whole
counties in the South were stripped of their colored laborers. The race
question, in its political and economic aspects, became less and less
sectional, more and more national. The South was drawn into the main
stream of national life. The separatist forces which produced the
cataclysm of 1861 sank irresistibly into the background.
=References=
H.W. Grady, _The New South_ (1890).
W.G. Brown, _The Lower South_.
E.G. Murphy, _Problems of the Present South_.
B.T. Washington, _The Negro Problem_; _The Story of the Negro_; _The
Future of the Negro_.
A.B. Hart, _The Southern South_ and R.S. Baker, _Following the Color
T.N. Page, _The Negro, the Southerner's Problem_.
=Questions=
2. Compare the condition of the South in 1865 with that of the North.
Compare with the condition of the United States at the close of the
3. Contrast the enfranchisement of the slaves with the enfranchisement
of white men fifty years earlier.
Northern manufacturers?
5. How does money capital contribute to prosperity? Describe the plight
of Southern finance.
6. Give the chief steps in the restoration of white supremacy.
7. Do you know of any other societies to compare with the Ku Klux Klan?
10. Compare the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments with regard to the
suffrage provisions.
12. Account for the Solid South. What was the situation before 1860?
13. In what ways did Southern agriculture tend to become like that of
the North? What were the social results?
the South, in particular.
colored population in the South.
sectional.
fourteenth amendment in the Appendix. Macdonald, _Documentary Source
Book of American History_, pp. 470 and 564. A plea for amnesty in
Harding, _Select Orations Illustrating American History_, pp. 467-488.
Political and Economic_ (American Nation Series), pp. 109-123; Hart,
497-500; Elson, _History of the United States_, pp. 799-805.
Paxson, _The New Nation_ (Riverside Series), pp. 39-58; Beard, _American
Government and Politics_, pp. 454-457.
Development_ (American Nation Series), pp. 84-102; Rhodes, _History of
the United States_, Vol. VIII, pp. 1-12.
=Southern Industry.=--Paxson, _The New Nation_, pp. 192-207; T.M. Young,
=The Race Question.=--B.T. Washington, _Up From Slavery_ (sympathetic
presentation); A.H. Stone, _Studies in the American Race Problem_
(coldly analytical); Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 647-649,
652-654, 663-669.
BUSINESS ENTERPRISE AND THE REPUBLICAN PARTY
generation that followed the age of Douglas and Lincoln, it must be
"business enterprise"--the tremendous, irresistible energy of a virile
people, mounting in numbers toward a hundred million and applied without
let or hindrance to the developing of natural resources of unparalleled
richness. The chief goal of this effort was high profits for the
captains of industry, on the one hand; and high wages for the workers,
1876, were golden harvest fields, whirling spindles, turning wheels,
The device blazoned on its shield and written over its factory doors was
"prosperity." A Republican President was its "advance agent." Released
confusing issues of the slavery controversy, business enterprise sprang
forward to the task of winning the entire country. Then it flung its
outposts to the uttermost parts of the earth--Europe, Africa, and the
Orient--where were to be found markets for American goods and natural
resources for American capital to develop.
RAILWAYS AND INDUSTRY
=The Outward Signs of Enterprise.=--It is difficult to comprehend all
the horizon of the twentieth century lie consequences as yet undreamed
of in our poor philosophy. Statisticians attempt to record its
comparison with the past. Against the slow and leisurely stagecoach,
less time than Washington consumed in his triumphal tour from Mt. Vernon
to New York for his first inaugural. Against the lazy sailing vessel
drifting before a genial breeze, they place the turbine steamer crossing
hours. For the old workshop where a master and a dozen workmen and
apprentices wrought by hand, they offer the giant factory where ten
thousand persons attend the whirling wheels driven by steam. They write
of the "romance of invention" and the "captains of industry."
=The Service of the Railway.=--All this is fitting in its way. Figures
and contrasts cannot, however, tell the whole story. Take, for example,
miles in 1860; 166,000 in 1890; and 242,000 in 1910. It is easy to show
knitted railways; or how, like the tentacles of a great monster, the few
multiplied until they tapped every wheat field, mine, and forest beyond
the valley. All this, eloquent of enterprise as it truly is, does not
indicate how railways made a continental market for American goods; nor
how they standardized the whole country, giving to cities on the
how they carried to the pioneer the comforts of civilization; nor yet
homesteads, the builders of states.
significant relation between railways and politics must not be
overlooked. The bounty of a lavish government, for example, made
area estimated as almost equal to Pennsylvania, New York, Connecticut,
Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont. The
Union Pacific Company alone secured from the federal government a free
each mile of railway, and a loan up to fifty millions of dollars secured
northern tier of states lying against Canada from Lake Michigan to the
outright to railway companies. These vast grants from the federal
government were supplemented by gifts from the states in land and by
engineered them would alone fill a large and interesting volume.
=Railway Fortunes and Capital.=--Out of this gigantic railway promotion,
the first really immense American fortunes were made. Henry Adams, the
million dollars, "supposed to be the largest estate in Boston," then one
of the few centers of great riches. Compared with the opulence that
Brooks was a poor man's heritage.
The capital invested in these railways was enormous beyond the
imagination of the men of the stagecoach generation. The total debt of
of little faith thought the country could never pay--was reckoned at a
figure well under $75,000,000. When the Union Pacific Railroad was
mortgage bonds, $27,000,000 in second mortgage bonds held by the
government, $10,000,000 in income bonds, $10,000,000 in land grant
stock--making $110,000,000 in all. If the amount due the United States
government be subtracted, still there remained, in private hands, stocks
and bonds exceeding in value the whole national debt of Hamilton's
day--a debt that strained all the resources of the Federal government in
1790. Such was the financial significance of the railways.
=Growth and Extension of Industry.=--In the field of manufacturing,
mining, and metal working, the results of business enterprise far
dollars invested in factories alone and five million wage-earners
employed in them; while the total value of the output, fourteen billion
dollars, was fifteen times the figure for 1860. In the Eastern states
industries multiplied. In the Northwest territory, the old home of
Jacksonian Democracy, they overtopped agriculture. By the end of the
Massachusetts in the annual value of manufacturing output.
That was not all. Untold wealth in the form of natural resources was
in the Mississippi Valley, and in the Western mountains from North
discovered and the great fields of Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota
soon rivaled those of the Appalachian area. Copper, lead, gold, and
silver in fabulous quantities were unearthed by the restless prospectors
who left no plain or mountain fastness unexplored. Petroleum, first
pumped from the wells of Pennsylvania in the summer of 1859, made new
fortunes equaling those of trade, railways, and land speculation. It
scattered its riches with an especially lavish hand through Oklahoma,
not advanced far before there appeared upon the scene still mightier
leaders of even greater imagination. New constructive genius now brought
together and combined under one management hundreds of concerns or
cooperation on a national scale. Price-cutting in oil, threatening ruin
to those engaged in the industry, as early as 1879, led a number of
companies in Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and Philadelphia to unite in
price-fixing. Three years later a group of oil interests formed a close
organization, placing all their stocks in the hands of trustees, among
certificates representing the share to which each participant was
entitled; and took over the management of the entire business. Such was
there loomed a giant trust or corporation, controlling, if not most of
the output, at least enough to determine in a large measure the prices
charged to consumers. With the passing years, the railways, mills,
owners to corporations. At the end of the nineteenth century, the whole
face of American business was changed. Three-fourths of the output from
one-fourth from individual and partnership undertakings.
=The Banking Corporation.=--Very closely related to the growth of
business enterprise on a large scale was the system of banking. In the
old days before banks, a person with savings either employed them in his
own undertakings, lent them to a neighbor, or hid them away where they
set no industry in motion. Even in the early stages of modern business,
it was common for a manufacturer to rise from small beginnings by
affairs was profoundly altered by the growth of the huge corporations
requiring millions and even billions of capital. The banks, once an
WALL STREET, NEW YORK CITY]
It was the banks that undertook to sell the stocks and bonds issued by
their operations. Indeed, many of the great mergers or combinations in
business were initiated by magnates in the banking world with millions
another, the banks formed a perfect network of agencies gathering up the
pennies and dollars of the masses as well as the thousands of the rich
and pouring them all into the channels of business and manufacturing.
In this growth of banking on a national scale, it was inevitable that a
few great centers, like Wall Street in New York or State Street in
corporations.
=The Significance of the Corporation.=--The corporation, in fact, became
marvelous institutions of all time, comparable in wealth and power and
facts are obvious. It made possible gigantic enterprises once entirely
many of the futile and costly wastes of competition in connection with
manufacture, advertising, and selling. It studied the cheapest methods
of production and shut down mills that were poorly equipped or
industry, chemistry, and mechanical inventions. Through the sale of
stocks and bonds, it enabled tens of thousands of people to become
for one person to own, for instance, a $50 share in a million dollar
business concern--a thing entirely impossible under a regime of
individual owners and partnerships.
over the labor market which enabled it to break even the strongest trade
unions. In short, the power of the trust in finance, in manufacturing,
in politics, and in the field of labor control can hardly be measured.
new relation. "In most parts of our country," as President Wilson once
which they used to work, but generally as employees--in a higher or
lower grade--of great corporations." The owner disappeared from the
factory and in his place came the manager, representing the usually
invisible stockholders and dependent for his success upon his ability to
which was to exert such a deep influence on American thinking about
=Cities and Immigration.=--Expressed in terms of human life, this era of
unprecedented enterprise meant huge industrial cities and an immense
labor supply, derived mainly from European immigration. Here, too,
figures tell only a part of the story. In Washington's day nine-tenths
of the American people were engaged in agriculture and lived in the
country; in 1890 more than one-third of the population dwelt in towns of
of over 2500. In forty years, between 1860 and 1900, Greater New York
342,000; Chicago from 109,000 to 1,698,000. The miles of city tenements
began to rival, in the number of their residents, the farm homesteads of
the West. The time so dreaded by Jefferson had arrived. People were
"piled upon one another in great cities" and the republic of small
farmers had passed away.
To these industrial centers flowed annually an ever-increasing tide of
immigration, reaching the half million point in 1880; rising to
as old as America but new elements now entered the situation. In the
newcomers. The migration from Northern Europe--England, Ireland,
Germany, and Scandinavia--diminished; that from Italy, Russia, and
Austria-Hungary increased, more than three-fourths of the entire number
coming from these three lands between the years 1900 and 1910. These
America.
that given to the immigrants in the early days. By 1890 all the free
land was gone. They could not, therefore, be dispersed widely among the
native Americans to assimilate quickly and unconsciously the habits and
ideas of American life. On the contrary, they were diverted mainly to
the industrial centers. There they crowded--nay, overcrowded--into
newspapers, and their old-world customs and views.
the old America inherited from the fathers. They even stimulated the
continent. As for the future, that was in the hands of Providence!
urged, "to protect American industry against foreign competition by
means of high tariffs on imported goods, to aid railways by generous
grants of land, to sell mineral and timber lands at low prices to
private business they held to be either wholly pernicious or intolerably
impertinent. Judging from their speeches and writings, they conceived
unions all struggling for profits or high wages and held together by a
government whose principal duty was to keep the peace among them and
political theory of business during the generation that followed the
Civil War.
=Business Men and Republican Policies.=--Most of the leaders in industry
far as the majority of its members were concerned--committed to
of railways and industry by land grants, and the development of internal
improvements. It was furthermore generous in its immigration policy. It
and flung wide the doors for immigrants eager to fill the factories, man
the mines, and settle upon Western lands. In a word the Republicans
stood for all those specific measures which favored the enlargement and
prosperity of business. At the same time they resisted government
interference with private enterprise. They did not regulate railway
companies from giving lower rates to some shippers than to others. To
business--prosperous and profitable industries for the owners and "the
who flourished under its policies gave their support to it, voted for
its candidates, and subscribed to its campaign funds.
=Sources of Republican Strength in the North.=--The Republican party was
in fact a political organization of singular power. It originated in a
wave of moral enthusiasm, having attracted to itself, if not the
and George William Curtis, who had opposed slavery when opposition was
longed for the independence of the farmer, owed to its indulgent land
policy the opportunity of securing free homesteads in the West. The
immigrant, landing penniless on these shores, as a result of the same
could turn with confidence for those rewards of service which the
government could bestow: pensions surpassing in liberality anything that
Republican party every investor in government bonds could look for the
full and honorable discharge of the interest and principal. The spoils
system, inaugurated by Jacksonian Democracy, in turn placed all the
Of all these things Republican leaders made full and vigorous use,
usage, merits and achievements not wholly its own. Particularly was this
Providence, this land was to be purged of human slavery ... the
Republican party came into power," ran a declaration in one platform.
universal suffrage," ran another. As for the aid rendered by the
millions of Northern Democrats who stood by the union and the tens of
thousands of them who actually fought in the union army, the Republicans
in their zeal were inclined to be oblivious. They repeatedly charged the
sympathized with treason."
North, the Republicans for a long time added the advantages that came
enfranchised negroes, under white leadership, gave a grateful support to
motives were so mixed that no historian can hope to appraise them all at
vigorous efforts of the honest and sincere friends of the freedmen to
slavery but all its badges of misery and servitude. On the same side
must be placed the labor of those who had valiantly fought in forum and
and who made use of "carpet-bagging" in the South to win the spoils that
the Republicans for many years kept a keen eye upon the maintenance of
their dominion in the South. Their declaration that neither the law nor
citizens by reason of race, color, or previous condition of servitude
appealed to idealists and brought results in elections. Even South
Republican control was made easy by the force bills described in a
previous chapter--measures which vested the supervision of elections in
federal officers appointed by Republican Presidents. These drastic
measures, departing from American tradition, the Republican authors
urged, were necessary to safeguard the purity of the ballot, not merely
in the South where the timid freedman might readily be frightened from
using it; but also in the North, particularly in New York City, where it
that the force bills were nothing but devices created by the Republicans
for the purpose of securing their continued rule through systematic
interference with elections. Even the measures of reconstruction were
deemed by Democratic leaders as thinly veiled schemes to establish
York and candidate for President in 1876, "that the paramount object and
Northern commonwealths.... When the Republican party resolved to
establish negro supremacy in the ten states in order to gain to itself
the representation of those states in Congress, it had to begin by
creation of new electoral bodies for those ten states, in which, by
exclusions, by disfranchisements and proscriptions, by control over
registration, by applying test oaths ... by intimidation and by every
form of influence, three million negroes are made to predominate over
allay the sectional feelings engendered by the war. The Republicans
union and insisted on calling them "traitors" and "rebels." The
Southerners, smarting under the reconstruction acts, could regard the
Republicans only as political oppressors. The passions of the war had
generation that went through it all remembered it all. For twenty
years, the Republicans, in their speeches and platforms, made "a
straight appeal to the patriotism of the Northern voters." They
Though the Democrats, especially in the North, resented this policy and
shirt," the Republicans refused to surrender a slogan which made such a
ready popular appeal. As late as 1884, a leader expressed the hope that
made political capital out of the fact that he had "insulted the
veterans of the Grand Army of the Republic" by going fishing on
Decoration Day.
=Three Republican Presidents.=--Fortified by all these elements of
strength, the Republicans held the presidency from 1869 to 1885. The
certain striking characteristics in common. They were all of origin
been generals in the union army. Grant, next to Lincoln, was regarded as
Republic. It is true that Grant was not a politician and had never voted
Garfield on the other hand were loyal party men. The former had served
when he received the nomination for President.
forgotten by the astute managers who led in selecting candidates. All
summons to military duties came--and Ohio was a strategic state. It lay
between the manufacturing East and the agrarian country to the West.
Having growing industries and wool to sell it benefited from the
protective tariff. Yet being mainly agricultural still, it was not
without sympathy for the farmers who showed low tariff or free trade
tendencies. Whatever share the East had in shaping laws and framing
division in privileges--not uncommon in political management--was always
accompanied by a judicious selection of the candidate for Vice
President. With Garfield, for example, was associated a prominent New
York politician, Chester A. Arthur, who, as fate decreed, was destined
to more than three years' service as chief magistrate, on the
assassination of his superior in office.
=The Disputed Election of 1876.=--While taking note of the long years of
Republican supremacy, it must be recorded that grave doubts exist in the
minds of many historians as to whether one of the three Presidents,
Hayes, was actually the victor in 1876 or not. His Democratic opponent,
Samuel J. Tilden, received a popular plurality of a quarter of a million
events, four states sent in double returns, one set for Tilden and
shrink from speaking of civil war again. Fortunately, in the end, the
counsels of peace prevailed. Congress provided for an electoral
THE GROWTH OF OPPOSITION TO REPUBLICAN RULE
=Abuses in American Political Life.=--During their long tenure of
Democrats manage to avoid such difficulties in those states and cities
where they had the majority. In New York City, for instance, the local
a group of politicians headed by "Boss" Tweed. He plundered the city
treasury until public-spirited citizens, supported by Samuel J. Tilden,
the Democratic leader of the state, rose in revolt, drove the ringleader
bosses were guilty of offenses as odious as those committed by New York
politicians. Indeed, the decade that followed the Civil War was marred
more corrupt as they grow in wealth?"
revelation after another showed officers, high and low, possessed with
the spirit of peculation. Members of Congress, it was found, accepted
concessions to the companies. In the administration as well as the
legislature the disease was rife. Revenue officers permitted whisky
distillers to evade their taxes and received heavy bribes in return. A
route frauds"--the deliberate overpayment of certain mail carriers whose
lines were indicated in the official record by asterisks or stars. Even
cabinet officers did not escape suspicion, for the trail of the serpent
In the lower ranges of official life, the spoils system became more
virulent as the number of federal employees increased. The holders of
the party ranging from the lowest township committee to the national
convention. They helped to nominate candidates and draft platforms and
Even the Civil Service Act of 1883, wrung from a reluctant Congress two
years after the assassination of Garfield, made little change for a long
On viewing this state of affairs, many a distinguished citizen became
profoundly discouraged. James Russell Lowell, for example, thought he
surrender, he had exclaimed: "There is something magnificent in having a
country to love!" Ten years later, when asked to write an ode for the
    "Show your state legislatures; show your Rings;
     And challenge Europe to produce such things
     To show your latest style in martyrs,--Tweed:
American who ever was?... What fills me with doubt and dismay is the
degradation of the moral tone. Is it or is it not a result of democracy?
Is ours a 'government of the people, by the people, for the people,' or
a Kakistocracy [a government of the worst], rather for the benefit of
knaves at the cost of fools?"
Lowell, himself a Republican and for a time American ambassador to
England, were shared by many men in his party. Very soon after the close
of the Civil War some of them began to protest vigorously against the
themselves Liberal Republicans, broke away altogether, nominated a
uncompromising Democrat. They accused Grant of using "the powers and
opportunities of his high office for the promotion of personal ends."
They charged him with retaining "notoriously corrupt and unworthy men in
places of power and responsibility." They alleged that the Republican
party kept "alive the passions and resentments of the late civil war to
use them for their own advantages," and employed the "public service of
the government as a machinery of corruption and personal influence."
It was not apparent, however, from the ensuing election that any
considerable number of Republicans accepted the views of the Liberals.
independent action was futile. So, at least, it was regarded by most men
of the rising generation like Henry Cabot Lodge, of Massachusetts, and
they insisted in season and out that reformers who desired to rid the
inside."
=The Mugwumps and Cleveland Democracy in 1884.=--Though aided by
Republican dissensions, the Democrats were slow in making headway
supremacy was established at the polls, and the last federal soldier
withdrawn from Southern capitals did they succeed in capturing the
presidency.
The opportune moment for them came in 1884 when a number of
circumstances favored their aspirations. The Republicans, leaving the
Ohio Valley in their search for a candidate, nominated James G. Blaine
of Maine, a vigorous and popular leader but a man under fire from the
find at this juncture an able candidate who had no political enemies in
the sphere of national politics, Grover Cleveland, then governor of New
York and widely celebrated as a man of "sterling honesty." At the same
Beecher, and William Everett, men of fine ideals and undoubted
knights of politics," they had a following that was not to be despised.
The campaign which took place that year was one of the most savage in
though mentioned, was not taken seriously. Abuse of the opposition was
the favorite resource of party orators. The Democrats insisted that "the
practice it is an organization for enriching those who control its
machinery." For the Republican candidate, Blaine, they could hardly find
words to express their contempt. The Republicans retaliated in kind.
denounced the "fraud and violence practiced by the Democracy in the
Cleveland as mayor of Buffalo and governor of New York, they attacked
from their own words when, after the election, they had time to reflect
change of a few hundred votes in New York would have sent his opponent
to the White House instead.
upon "every consumer in the land for the benefit of our manufacturers."
Business enterprise was thoroughly alarmed. The Republicans
descendant of the hero of Tippecanoe, and a son of the old Northwest.
the House of Representatives, enacted in 1890 a tariff law imposing the
highest duties yet laid in our history. To their utter surprise,
however, they were instantly informed by the country that their program
presidential campaign, Cleveland once more leading his party to victory.
J.P. Davis, _Union Pacific Railway_.
J.M. Swank, _History of the Manufacture of Iron_.
M.T. Copeland, _The Cotton Manufacturing Industry in the United States_
E.W. Bryce, _Progress of Invention in the Nineteenth Century_.
H.P. Fairchild, _Immigration_, and F.J. Warne, _The Immigrant Invasion_
(Both works favor exclusion).
presidential elections of the period.
1. Contrast the state of industry and commerce at the close of the Civil
War with its condition at the close of the Revolutionary War.
2. Enumerate the services rendered to the nation by the railways.
3. Explain the peculiar relation of railways to government.
6. Are the people in cities more or less independent than the farmers?
7. State some of the problems raised by unrestricted immigration.
8. What was the theory of the relation of government to business in this
9. State the leading economic policies sponsored by the Republican
11. What illustrations can you give showing the influence of war in
American political campaigns?
13. Enumerate some of the abuses that appeared in American political
14. Sketch the rise and growth of the reform movement.
=Research Topics=
=Invention, Discovery, and Transportation.=--Sparks, _National
pp. 92-107; Rhodes, _History of the United States_, Vol. VII, pp. 1-29,
64-73, 175-206; Wilson, _History of the American People_, Vol. IV, pp.
78-96.
=Immigration.=--Coman, _Industrial History of the United States_ (2d
ed.), pp. 369-374; E.L. Bogart, _Economic History of the United States_,
pp. 420-422, 434-437; Jenks and Lauck, _Immigration Problems_, Commons,
=The Disputed Election of 1876.=--Haworth, _The United States in Our Own
Time_, pp. 82-94; Dunning, _Reconstruction, Political and Economic_
(American Nation Series), pp. 294-341; Elson, _History of the United
=Abuses in Political Life.=--Dunning, _Reconstruction_, pp. 281-293; see
136-167.
=Studies of Presidential Administrations.=--(_a_) Grant, (_b_) Hayes,
_The United States in Our Own Time_, or in Paxson, _The New Nation_
(Riverside Series), or still more briefly in Elson.
Rhodes, _History of the United States_, Vol. VIII, pp. 240-327; Elson,
pp. 857-887.
=Analysis of Modern Immigration Problems.=--_Syllabus in History_ (New
CHAPTER XVIII
the middle border. Beyond the Rockies, California, Oregon, and Nevada
stood guard, the last of them having been just admitted to furnish
another vote for the fifteenth amendment abolishing slavery. Between the
near and far frontiers lay a vast reach of plain, desert, plateau, and
Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, the Dakotas, and
Oklahoma, had fewer than half a million inhabitants. It was laid out
inhabitants, a legislature elected by the voters. No railway line
of the Eastern lines. It required twenty-five days for a passenger to
make the overland journey to California by the stagecoach system,
organized in 1860, to carry a letter to San Francisco. Indians still
roamed the plain and desert and more than one powerful tribe disputed
the white man's title to the soil.
=Opening Railways to the Pacific.=--A decade before the Civil War the
been recognized. Pressure had already been brought to bear on Congress
its aid. Both the Democrats and Republicans approved the idea, but it
was involved in the slavery controversy. Indeed it was submerged in it.
The North had its way during the war. Congress, by legislation initiated
in 1862, provided for the immediate organization of companies to build a
loans of money to aid in the enterprise. The Western end, the Central
heavily financed by the Mormons of Utah and also by the state
Civil War and immigrants from Ireland and Germany. In 1869 the two
companies met near Ogden in Utah and the driving of the last spike,
uniting the Atlantic and the Pacific, was the occasion of a great
Other lines to the Pacific were projected at the same time; but the
vigor and the year 1883 marked a series of railway triumphs. In February
trains were running from New Orleans through Houston, San Antonio, and
Yuma to San Francisco, as a result of a union of the Texas Pacific with
the Southern Pacific and its subsidiary corporations. In September the
Superior was connected with Puget Sound. The waters explored by Joliet
and Marquette were joined to the waters plowed by Sir Francis Drake
while he was searching for a route around the world. That same year also
a third line was opened to the Pacific by way of the Atchison, Topeka
and Santa Fe, making connections through Albuquerque and Needles with
San Francisco. The fondest hopes of railway promoters seemed to be
[Illustration: UNITED STATES IN 1870]
Atlantic seaboard, railways followed population and markets. In the Far
missionaries to spread the gospel of "Western opportunity" to people in
the Middle West, in the Eastern cities, and in Southern states. Then
to the distant Dakotas and still farther afield. So the development of
pushed by men of imagination--adventurers who made a romance of
past.
from the government; they overcame every obstacle of canon, mountain,
and stream with the aid of science; they built cities according to the
steamboat connections formed with the rest of the world, they carried
land. It was in this way that "the frontier speculator paved the way for
through the Island Lake country, and will have five good North Dakota
towns. The stations on the line will be well equipped with elevators and
grain season. Prospective merchants have been active in securing
desirable locations at the different towns on the line. There are still
opportunities for hotels, general merchandise, hardware, furniture, and
A TOWN ON THE PRAIRIE]
Among the railway promoters and builders in the West, James J. Hill,
of the Great Northern and allied lines, was one of the most forceful
Illinois, Wisconsin, and Nebraska especially. He sent out agents to tell
the story of Western opportunity in this vein: "You see your children
come out of school with no chance to get farms of their own because the
afford to buy land to start your sons out in life around you. They have
hire out as farm hands. There is no future for them there. If you are
and see them prosper around you, don't leave here. But if you want
independence, if you are renting your land, if the money-lender is
do no worse by moving.... You farmers talk of free trade and protection
vote a homestead for yourself? That is the only thing Uncle Sam will
in the real estate business. We don't want you to go out West and make a
failure of it because the rates at which we haul you and your goods make
Hill was seeking permanent settlers who would produce, manufacture, and
rates and let his passengers take a good deal of live stock and
household furniture free. By doing this he made an appeal that was
Indiana in fourteen passenger coaches, filled with men, women, and
children, and forty-eight freight cars carrying their household goods
Middle West and the South, responding to his call, went to the Western
country where they brought eight million acres of prairie land under
When Hill got his people on the land, he took an interest in everything
that increased the productivity of their labor. Was the output of food
for his freight cars limited by bad drainage on the farms? Hill then
farmers hampered in hauling their goods to his trains by bad roads? In
that case, he urged upon the states the improvement of highways. Did the
traffic slacken because the food shipped was not of the best quality?
Then live stock must be improved and scientific farming promoted. Did
advance it. In all conferences on scientific farm management,
conservation of natural resources, banking and credit in relation to
agriculture and industry, Hill was an active participant. His was the
foundation of prosperity for the railways and the people.
as well as to Europe as an outlet for the surplus of the farms. He sent
agents to China and Japan to discover what American goods and produce
Americans in exchange. To open the Pacific trade he bought two ocean
monsters, the _Minnesota_ and the _Dakota_, thus preparing for
easy it was for them to make their purchase in this country and ship by
and promoter, who helped to break the virgin soil of the prairies, lived
through the pioneer epoch and into the age of great finance. Before he
jennies of Manchester and the docks of Yokohama.
THE EVOLUTION OF GRAZING AND AGRICULTURE
=The Removal of the Indians.=--Unlike the frontier of New England in
builders in the Far West had little difficulty with warlike natives.
Indian attacks were made on the railway construction gangs; General
Custer had his fatal battle with the Sioux in 1876 and there were minor
abandoned in 1871 and most of them were concentrated in reservations
where they were mainly supported by the government. The supervision of
their affairs was vested in a board of commissioners created in 1869 and
instructed to treat them as wards of the nation--a trust which
Indians, thus permitting them to become citizens and settle down among
more tractable and more willing to surrender the freedom of the hunter
affording an outlet for stock, there sprang up to the westward cattle
and sheep raising on an immense scale. The far-famed American cowboy was
the hero in this scene. Great herds of cattle were bred in Texas; with
it is estimated that nearly one million head of cattle were moved out of
Texas to the North by four thousand cowboys, supplied with 30,000
horses and ponies.
During the two decades from 1870 to 1890 both the cattle men and the
sheep raisers had an almost free run of the plains, using public lands
without paying for the privilege and waging war on one another over the
possession of ranges. At length, however, both had to go, as the
with endless lines of barbed wire. Already in 1893 a writer familiar
with the frontier lamented the passing of the picturesque days: "The
unique position of the cowboys among the Americans is jeopardized in a
farm-land views; farmers are pre-empting valleys and the sides of
waterways; and the day is not far distant when stock-raising must be
love of the free life and bold companionship that once tempted men into
grazing country forbid the wearing of side arms; nobody shoots up these
towns any more. The fact is the old simon-pure cowboy days are gone
already."
away the Indians and the cattle rangers. The first was the policy of the
railway companies in selling large blocks of land received from the
cost save a small registration fee, public lands in lots of 160 acres
should occupy the farm for five years before his title was finally
confirmed. Even this stipulation was waived in the case of the Civil War
part of the five years' occupancy required. As the soldiers of the
Revolutionary and Mexican wars had advanced in great numbers to the
frontier in earlier days, so now veterans led in the settlement of the
middle border. Along with them went thousands of German, Irish, and
Scandinavian immigrants, fresh from the Old World. Between 1867 and
twenty years (1860-80), the population of Nebraska leaped from 28,000 to
almost half a million; Kansas from 100,000 to a million; Iowa from
600,000 to 1,600,000; and the Dakotas from 5000 to 140,000.
=The Diversity of Western Agriculture.=--In soil, produce, and
management, Western agriculture presented many contrasts to that of the
East and South. In the region of arable and watered lands the typical
American unit--the small farm tilled by the owner--appeared as usual;
but by the side of it many a huge domain owned by foreign or Eastern
shape of the "bonanza farm" devoted mainly to wheat and corn and
Utah, Colorado, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, and parts of adjoining
American farmer was accustomed could not be grown at all. The Mormons
were the first Anglo-Saxons to encounter aridity, and they were baffled
at first; but they studied it and mastered it by magnificent irrigation
systems. As other settlers poured into the West the problem of the
desert was attacked with a will, some of them replying to the
commiseration of Eastern farmers by saying that it was easier to scoop
out an irrigation ditch than to cut forests and wrestle with stumps and
stones. Private companies bought immense areas at low prices, built
sank wells into the dry sand and were rewarded with gushers that "soused
good-for-anything loam." The federal government came to the aid of the
arid regions in 1894 by granting lands to the states to be used for
provided for the sale of the redeemed lands to actual settlers. Finally
strength to that of individuals, companies, and states in conquering
"arid America."
"Nowhere," writes Powell, a historian of the West, in his picturesque
transit and the level, the drill and the dredge, the pick and the spade;
within the space of less than thirty years penetrated, explored, and
acquaintance with any one of the three before; of how, realizing the
necessity for means of communication, he built highways of steel across
undismayed by the savageness of the countenance which the desert turned
and slashed the face of the desert with canals and irrigating ditches,
high in the mountains; and of how, in the conquered and submissive soil,
he replaced the aloe with alfalfa, the mesquite with maize, the cactus
with cotton, forms one of the most inspiring chapters in our history. It
is one of the epics of civilization, this reclamation of the Southwest,
and its heroes, thank God, are Americans.
"Other desert regions have been redeemed by irrigation--Egypt, for
those regions lay stretched out in the shade of a convenient palm,
the fact that God, the government, and Carnegie help those who help
evenings in writing letters to Washington with toil-hardened hands.
After a time the government was prodded into action and the great dams
themselves into cooperative leagues and water-users' associations, took
up the work of reclamation where the government left off; it is to these
energetic, persevering men who have drilled wells, plowed fields, and
stretches from Yuma to Tucson, that the metamorphosis of Arizona is
due."
The effect of irrigation wherever introduced was amazing. Stretches of
corn, fruits, vegetables, and grass. Huge ranches grazed by browsing
sheep were broken up into small plots. The cowboy and ranchman vanished.
In their place rose the prosperous community--a community unlike the
township of Iowa or the industrial center of the East. Its intensive
families together in village life rather than dispersing them on the
a burden that in other days fell heavily upon the shoulders of the
farmer and his family.
=Mineral Resources.=--In another important particular the Far West
pioneers who first opened the country. The discovery of gold in
miners, and promoters who explored the valleys, climbed the hills,
washed the sands, and dug up the soil in their feverish search for gold,
silver, copper, coal, and other minerals. In Nevada and Montana the
Gulch became Virginia City in 1863; Last Chance Gulch was named Helena
in 1864; and Confederate Gulch was christened Diamond City in 1865. At
advanced and stock and sheep raising introduced on a large scale,
minerals continued to be the chief source of wealth in a number of
oats combined; the copper of Montana sold for more than all the cereals
mainly mining, the receipts from the mineral output being $43,000,000 or
more than one-half the national debt of Hamilton's day. The yield of the
Arizona were totaled at $43,000,000 as against a wool clip reckoned at
[Illustration: _Photograph from Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
=Timber Resources.=--The forests of the great West, unlike those of the
Ohio Valley, proved a boon to the pioneers rather than a foe to be
attacked. In Ohio and Indiana, for example, the frontier line of
homemakers had to cut, roll, and burn thousands of trees before they
could put out a crop of any size. Beyond the Mississippi, however,
there were all ready for the breaking plow great reaches of almost
treeless prairie, where every stick of timber was precious. In the other
parts, often rough and mountainous, where stood primeval forests of the
finest woods, the railroads made good use of the timber. They consumed
acres of forests themselves in making ties, bridge timbers, and
telegraph poles, and they laid a heavy tribute upon the forests for
their annual upkeep. The surplus trees, such as had burdened the
pioneers of the Northwest Territory a hundred years before, they carried
=Western Industries.=--The peculiar conditions of the Far West
stimulated a rise of industries more rapid than is usual in new country.
The mining activities which in many sections preceded agriculture called
for sawmills to furnish timber for the mines and smelters to reduce and
The fruits and vegetables of California brought into existence
innumerable canneries. The lumber industry, starting with crude sawmills
settlement and furnished a ready outlet for local manufactures, so they
state of affairs quite unlike that which obtained in the Ohio Valley in
the early days before the opening of the Erie Canal.
summoned from all sections of the country for the harvests. The mineral
resources created hundreds of huge fortunes which made the accumulations
of eastern mercantile families look trivial by comparison. Other
Everywhere in the grazing country he was a conspicuous and important
city property.... He had his rating in the commercial reviews and could
hobnob with bankers, railroad presidents, and metropolitan merchants....
legislature, and sometimes defeated a lawyer or metropolitan 'business
man' in the race for a seat in Congress. In proportion to their numbers,
Although many of the early capitalists of the great West, especially
from Nevada, spent their money principally in the East, others took
leadership in promoting the sections in which they had made their
owed its first impressive buildings to the civic patriotism of Horace
Tabor, a wealthy mine owner. Leland Stanford paid his tribute to
California in the endowment of a large university. Colonel W.F. Cody,
town" which collapsed, and made a large sum of money supplying buffalo
meat to construction hands (hence his popular name). By his famous Wild
West Show, he increased it to a fortune which he devoted mainly to the
promotion of a western reclamation scheme.
While the Far West was developing this vigorous, aggressive leadership
in business, a considerable industrial population was springing up. Even
peculiar features which made a lasting impression on western economic
life. Mining, lumbering, and fruit growing, for instance, employed
thousands of workers during the rush months and turned them out at other
from camp to camp, from town to town, and from ranch to ranch, without
fixed homes or established habits of life. From this extraordinary
condition there issued many a long and lawless conflict between capital
and labor, giving a distinct color to the labor movement in whole
sections of the mountain and coast states.
THE ADMISSION OF NEW STATES
=The Spirit of Self-Government.=--The instinct of self-government was
organization of volunteer committees, known as "vigilantes," to suppress
crime and punish criminals. As soon as enough people were settled
permanently in a region, they took care to form a more stable kind of
government. An illustration of this process is found in the Oregon
in an editorial in an old copy of the _Rocky Mountain News_: "We claim
as not to be under any active and protecting branch of the central
enact such laws and regulations as may be necessary for their own
safety, protection, and happiness, always with the condition precedent,
region was merely one of the territories of the United States, the
appointment of the governor and other officers was controlled by
rights, forests, and water power was also in the hands of national
leaders. Thus practical considerations were united with the spirit of
independence in the quest for local autonomy.
=Nebraska and Colorado.=--Two states, Nebraska and Colorado, had little
difficulty in securing admission to the union. The first, Nebraska, had
been organized as a territory by the famous Kansas-Nebraska bill which
did so much to precipitate the Civil War. Lying to the north of Kansas,
which had been admitted in 1861, it escaped the invasion of slave owners
it claimed a population of only 67,000, it was regarded with kindly
This was hardly accomplished before the people of Colorado to the
southwest began to make known their demands. They had been organized
but within ten years the aspect of their affairs had completely changed.
had attracted an army of miners and prospectors. The city of Denver,
founded in 1858 and named after the governor of Kansas whence came many
a prosperous center of trade. By 1875 it was reckoned that the
population of the territory was not less than one hundred thousand; the
member of the American union.
=Six New States (1889-1890).=--For many years there was a deadlock in
Congress over the admission of new states. The spell was broken in 1889
under the leadership of the Dakotas. For a long time the Dakota
pioneers were swarming over the country. Farmers from the adjoining
Minnesota and the Eastern states, Scandinavians, Germans, and Canadians,
even as far away as the fjords of Norway. Seldom had the plow of man cut
through richer soil than was found in the bottoms of the Red River
Valley, and it became all the more precious when the opening of the
Northern Pacific in 1883 afforded a means of transportation east and
half million mark before ten years had elapsed.
Remembering that Nebraska had been admitted with only 67,000
federal tutelage. At the same time Washington, far away on the Pacific
Coast, Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming, boasting of their populations and
Congress were busy with politics. The Democrats saw no good reason for
admitting new Republican states until after their defeat in 1888. Near
the end of their term the next year they opened the door for North and
brought Idaho and Wyoming into the union, the latter with woman
well-settled and industrious community, its admission to the union was
delayed on account of popular hostility to the practice of polygamy. The
Mormon Church in case the practice of plural marriages was not stopped.
Meanwhile the Gentile or non-Mormon population was steadily increasing
against the sentiment of the country was futile. At last in 1896 Utah
marriages absolutely and forever. Horace Greeley, who visited Utah in
in the land of Brigham Young. His prophecy had come true.
[Illustration: THE UNITED STATES IN 1912]
=Rounding out the Continent.=--Three more territories now remained out
region, the last in the history of America, was marked by all the frenzy
with families in wagons, men and women on horseback and on foot, burst
into the territory. During the first night a city of tents was raised at
half a million. To the west, Arizona with a population of about 125,000
and New Mexico with 200,000 inhabitants joined Oklahoma in asking for
statehood. Congress, then Republican, looked with reluctance upon the
addition of more Democratic states; but in 1907 it was literally
compelled by public sentiment and a sense of justice to admit Oklahoma.
two years Arizona and New Mexico were "under the roof." So the
continental domain was rounded out.
     "May 12th, Chicago.--Chocolate and morning journals last
     seen on the hotel breakfast table.
     their final appearance.
     26th, Manhattan.--Potatoes and eggs last recognized among
     the blessings that 'brighten as they take their flight.'
     27th, Junction City.--Last visitation of a boot-black, with
     dissolving views of a board bedroom. Beds bid us good-by."
[Illustration: _Copyright by Panama-California Exposition_
THE CANADIAN BUILDING AT THE PANAMA-CALIFORNIA INTERNATIONAL
EXPOSITION, SAN DIEGO, 1915]
cars and enjoying at the hotels all the comforts of a standardized
of the frontier that were gone. Of far more consequence was the
disappearance of free lands with all that meant for American labor. For
more than a hundred years, any man of even moderate means had been able
to secure a homestead of his own and an independent livelihood. For a
hundred years America had been able to supply farms to as many
immigrants as cared to till the soil. Every new pair of strong arms
meant more farms and more wealth. Workmen in Eastern factories, mines,
had disappeared. American industrial workers confronted a new situation.
=Grain Supplants King Cotton.=--In the meantime a revolution was taking
place in agriculture. Until 1860 the chief staples sold by America were
cotton and tobacco. With the advance of the frontier, corn and wheat
supplanted them both in agrarian economy. The West became the granary of
the East and of Western Europe. The scoop shovel once used to handle
grain was superseded by the towering elevator, loading and unloading
thousands of bushels every hour. The refrigerator car and ship made the
packing industry as stable as the production of cotton or corn, and gave
an immense impetus to cattle raising and sheep farming. So the meat of
the West took its place on the English dinner table by the side of bread
baked from Dakotan wheat.
movement were manifold and striking. Billions of dollars' worth of
markets where they paid off debts due money lenders and acquired
progress of American financiers toward national independence. The
country, which had timidly turned to the Old World for capital in
Hamilton's day and had borrowed at high rates of interest in London in
Lincoln's day, moved swiftly toward the time when it would be among the
cultivation, the abandoned farms of the New England hills bearing solemn
raising, as well as wheat and corn production, suffered at least a
grade were forced to go West or were driven to the margin of
subsistence. Even the herds that supplied Eastern cities with milk were
thousand ways. The demand for farm machinery, clothing, boots, shoes,
Hamilton had never foreseen. Moreover it helped to expand far into the
industrial empire. Herein lies the explanation of the growth of
mid-western cities after 1865. Chicago, with its thirty-five railways,
the water routes of the Lakes, thus creating a strategic center for
Chicago before 1860. From Troy, New York, went a large stove plant. That
rose as a matter of course at a point so advantageous for cattle raisers
and shippers and so well connected with Eastern markets.
To the opening of the Far West also the Lake region was indebted for a
basin of North America." The produce of the West and the manufactures of
the East poured through it in an endless stream. The swift growth of
shipbuilding on the Great Lakes helped to compensate for the decline of
thousand ton Leviathan for ore or grain about "as quickly as carpenters
could put up an eight-room house." Thus in relation to the Far West the
old Northwest territory--the wilderness of Jefferson's time--had taken
the position formerly occupied by New England alone. It was supplying
capital and manufactures for a vast agricultural empire West and South.
=America on the Pacific.=--It has been said that the Mediterranean Sea
developed on the shores of the Atlantic; and that the future belongs to
and it undoubtedly has a still greater significance for the future.
Hawaiian Islands, China, and Japan. Two years before the adjustment of
the Oregon controversy with England, namely in 1844, the United States
had established official and trading relations with China. Ten years
later, four years after the admission of California to the union, the
from Honolulu carried sugar, molasses, and fruits from Hawaii to the
Oregon port of Astoria. The next year a vessel from Hongkong brought
rice, mats, and tea from China. An era of lucrative trade was opened.
of the Boxer rebellion in Peking in 1900, were but signs and symbols of
American power on the Pacific.
[Illustration: _From an old print_
COMMODORE PERRY'S MEN MAKING PRESENTS TO THE JAPANESE]
and the nation. The people of the whole United States suddenly were
exploit and to the forests and minerals awaiting the ax and the pick.
countries of the Old World--the scientific use of the soils and
the easy path of giving away arable land and selling forest and mineral
lands at low prices. Now it had to face far more difficult and complex
problems. It also had to consider questions of land tenure again,
maintained. While there was plenty of land for every man or woman who
wanted a home on the soil, it made little difference if single landlords
or companies got possession of millions of acres, if a hundred men in
one western river valley owned 17,000,000 acres; but when the good land
the opening of the twentieth century the nation, which a hundred years
compelled to enact law after law conserving its forests and minerals.
Then it was that the great state of California, on the very border of
the continent, felt constrained to enact a land settlement measure
into small lots and to make it easy for actual settlers to acquire small
farms. America was passing into a new epoch.
=References=
Henry Inman, _The Old Santa Fe Trail_.
R.I. Dodge, _The Plains of the Great West_ (1877).
C.H. Shinn, _The Story of the Mine_.
Cy Warman, _The Story of the Railroad_.
Emerson Hough, _The Story of the Cowboy_.
T.H. Hittel, _History of California_ (4 vols.).
W.H. Olin, _American Irrigation Farming_.
W.E. Smythe, _The Conquest of Arid America_.
E.S. Meany, _History of the State of Washington_.
=Questions=
1. Name the states west of the Mississippi in 1865.
4. What were the striking physical features of the West?
6. Why was admission to the union so eagerly sought?
7. Explain how politics became involved in the creation of new states.
8. Did the West rapidly become like the older sections of the country?
9. What economic peculiarities did it retain or develop?
10. How did the federal government aid in western agriculture?
11. How did the development of the West affect the East? The South?
12. What relation did the opening of the great grain areas of the West
bear to the growth of America's commercial and financial power?
13. State some of the new problems of the West.
14. Discuss the significance of American expansion to the Pacific Ocean.
=The Passing of the Wild West.=--Haworth, _The United States in Our Own
Times_, pp. 100-124.
=The Indian Question.=--Sparks, _National Development_ (American Nation
=The Chinese Question.=--Sparks, _National Development_, pp. 229-250;
Rhodes, _History of the United States_, Vol. VIII, pp. 180-196.
230-245; E.V. Smalley, _The Northern Pacific Railroad_; Paxson, _The New
Nation_ (Riverside Series), pp. 20-26, especially the map on p. 23, and
pp. 142-148.
=Agriculture and Business.=--Schafer, _Pacific Northwest_, pp. 246-289.
=Ranching in the Northwest.=--Theodore Roosevelt, _Ranch Life_, and
=The Conquest of the Desert.=--W.E. Smythe, _The Conquest of Arid
America_.
=Studies of Individual Western States.=--Consult any good encyclopedia.
CHAPTER XIX
although they engaged in heated presidential campaigns, were not sharply
and clearly opposed on many matters of vital significance. During none
rent the country in 1800 when Jefferson rode a popular wave to victory,
or again in 1828 when Jackson's western hordes came sweeping into power.
The Democrats, who before 1860 definitely opposed protective tariffs,
federal banking, internal improvements, and heavy taxes, now spoke
cautiously on all these points. The Republicans, conscious of the fact
that they had been a minority of the voters in 1860 and warned by the
and again the votes in Congress showed that no clear line separated all
the Democrats from all the Republicans. There were Republicans who
favored tariff reductions and "cheap money." There were Democrats who
looked with partiality upon high protection or with indulgence upon the
grounds.
in the country. The fact that, out of the eighteen years between 1875
and 1893, the Democrats held the House of Representatives for fourteen
years while the Republicans had every President but one showed that the
voters, like the politicians, were in a state of indecision. Hayes had a
Democratic House during his entire term and a Democratic Senate for two
majority in the Senate during his first administration; and at the same
time was supported by a Democratic majority in the House. Harrison was
sustained by continuous Republican successes in Senatorial elections;
but in the House he had the barest majority from 1889 to 1891 and lost
that altogether at the election held in the middle of his term. The
still distracted by memories of the dead past and uncertain as to the
THE CURRENCY QUESTION
Nevertheless these years of muddled politics and nebulous issues proved
campaign of 1896. Except for three new features--the railways, the
were the same as those that had engaged their attention since the
the tariff, and taxation.
=Debtors and the Fall in Prices.=--For many reasons the currency
of cotton, corn, wheat, and hogs to meet interest and principal when
due. During the war, the Western farmers had been able to dispose of
later. The meaning of this for the farmers in debt--and nearly
three-fourths of them were in that class--can be shown by a single
illustration. A thousand-dollar mortgage on a Western farm could be paid
sun; and in its price he found the test of his prosperity.
=Creditors and Falling Prices.=--To the bondholders or creditors, on the
other hand, falling prices were clear gain. If a fifty-dollar coupon on
thirty, the advantage to the owner of the coupon was obvious. Moreover
the advantage seemed to him entirely just. Creditors had suffered heavy
losses when the Civil War carried prices skyward while the interest
rates on their old bonds remained stationary. For example, if a man had
a $1000 bond issued before 1860 and paying interest at five per cent, he
buy a bushel of wheat; in 1865 it would only buy half a bushel. When
prices--that is, the cost of living--began to go down, creditors
therefore generally regarded the change with satisfaction as a return to
=The Cause of Falling Prices.=--The fall in prices was due, no doubt, to
government buying for war purposes, labor-saving farm machinery,
immigration, and the opening of new wheat-growing regions. The currency,
more money. They viewed it as a case of supply and demand. If there was
a small volume of currency in circulation, prices would be low; if there
they advocated more paper notes--greenbacks--and then they turned to
silver as the remedy. The creditors, on the other hand, naturally
greenbacks withdrawn from circulation and gold--a metal more limited in
volume than silver--made the sole basis of the national monetary system.
the Treasury to withdraw the greenbacks from circulation. The paper
in 1878, it forced Congress to provide for the continuous re-issue of
the legal tender notes as they came into the Treasury in payment of
    "Thou, Greenback, 'tis of thee
     Fair money of the free,
      Of thee we sing."
that on and after January 1, 1879, "the Secretary of the Treasury shall
redeem in coin the United States legal tender notes then outstanding on
United States in the City of New York in sums of not less than fifty
large hoard of gold. "On the appointed day," wrote the assistant
presented for coin--$400,000 of gold for notes.' That was all.
Resumption was accomplished with no disturbance. By five o'clock the
news was all over the land, and the New York bankers were sipping their
tea in absolute safety."
=The Specie Problem--the Parity of Gold and Silver.=--Defeated in their
efforts to stop "the present suicidal and destructive policy of
in the volume of silver in circulation. This precipitated one of the
legal as well as economic points. The Constitution gave Congress the
and silver legal tender in the payment of debts. It evidently
contemplated the use of both metals in the currency system. Such, at
least, was the view of many eminent statesmen, including no less a
personage than James G. Blaine. The difficulty, however, lay in
exceeds the value of the silver in a silver dollar on the open market,
men will hoard gold money and leave silver money in circulation. When,
for example, Congress in 1792 fixed the ratio of the two metals at one
to fifteen--one ounce of gold declared worth fifteen of silver--it was
soon found that gold had been undervalued. When again in 1834 the ratio
Consequently the latter metal was not brought in for coinage and silver
almost dropped out of circulation. Many a silver dollar was melted down
by silverware factories.
=Silver Demonetized in 1873.=--So things stood in 1873. At that time,
was denounced later by the friends of silver as "the crime of '73," a
conspiracy devised by the money power and secretly carried out. This
of the argument on the mint law it was distinctly said by one speaker at
least: "This bill provides for the making of changes in the legal tender
coin of the country and for substituting as legal tender, coin of only
controversy, the people apparently did not appreciate, at the time, the
significance of the "demonetization" of silver; but within a few years
for gold. Three years later, the countries of the Latin Union followed
this example, thus helping to enhance the price of the yellow metal. All
placed the paper money on a gold basis. Within twenty years silver was
worth in gold only about half the price of 1870.
of that metal. They alleged that gold had gone up because it had been
given a monopoly in the coinage markets of civilized governments. This
monopoly, they continued, was the fruit of a conspiracy against the
the placing of the greenbacks on a gold basis had itself worked a
efforts on opening the mints of the government for the free coinage of
=Republicans and Democrats Divided.=--On this question both Republicans
and Democrats were divided, the line being drawn between the East on the
speech delivered in the Senate in 1878, that, as the Constitution
required Congress to make both gold and silver the money of the land,
the only question left was that of fixing the ratio between them. He
reopening of the government mints of the world to silver would bring it
up to its old relation with gold. He admitted also that their most
ominous warnings were well founded, saying: "I believe the struggle now
going on in this country and in other countries for a single gold
effect on all forms of property, except those investments which yield a
fixed return."
on borrowed capital," said Senator Jones, of Nevada. "Three-fourths of
been bought on time and a very large proportion of them are mortgaged
for the payment of some part of the purchase money. Under the operation
of a shrinkage in the volume of money, this enormous mass of borrowers,
at the maturity of their respective debts, though nominally paying no
more than the amount borrowed, with interest, are in reality, in the
than they received--more in equity than they contracted to pay.... In
all discussions of the subject the creditors attempt to brush aside the
equities involved by sneering at the debtors."
=The Silver Purchase Act (1878).=--Even before the actual resumption of
specie payment, the advocates of free silver were a power to be reckoned
House of Representatives in 1878 and they carried a silver bill through
that chamber. Blocked by the Republican Senate they accepted a
compromise in the Bland-Allison bill, which provided for huge monthly
President Hayes vetoed the measure.
The effect of this act, as some had anticipated, was disappointing. It
did not stay silver on its downward course. Thereupon the silver faction
pressed through Congress in 1886 a bill providing for the issue of paper
certificates based on the silver accumulated in the Treasury. Still
they would be content with nothing short of free coinage at the ratio of
sixteen to one. If the issue had been squarely presented in 1890, there
majority in both houses of Congress; but it was not presented.
=The Sherman Silver Purchase Act and the Bond Sales.=--Republican
leaders, particularly from the East, stemmed the silver tide by a
diversion of forces. They passed the Sherman Act of 1890 providing for
large monthly purchases of silver and for the issue of notes redeemable
policy of the United States to maintain the two metals on a parity with
provided by law." For a while silver was buoyed up. Then it turned once
more on its downward course. In the meantime the Treasury was in a sad
gold was brought in at the front door of the Treasury, notes were
back door. Alarmed at the vicious circle thus created, he urged upon
Congress the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act. For this he was
roundly condemned by many of his own followers who branded his conduct
as "treason to the party"; but the Republicans, especially from the
East, came to his rescue and in 1893 swept the troublesome sections of
the law from the statute book. The anger of the silver faction knew no
bounds, and the leaders made ready for the approaching presidential
campaign.
THE PROTECTIVE TARIFF AND TAXATION
=Fluctuation in Tariff Policy.=--As each of the old parties was divided
on the currency question, it is not surprising that there was some
tariff tended to align the manufacturing East against the agricultural
during the Civil War. If we except the reductions of 1872 which were
soon offset by increases, we may say that those rates were substantially
unchanged for nearly twenty years. When a revision was brought about,
revising the tariff on the theory that it ought to be reformed by its
Republicans also who enacted the McKinley tariff bill of 1890, which
The Democrats on their part were not all confirmed free traders or even
advocates of tariff for revenue only. In Cleveland's first
President. The assault, however, proved to be a futile gesture for it
was blocked by the Republicans in the Senate. When, after the sweeping
victory of 1892, the Democrats in the House again attempted to bring
driven into a compromise that looked more like a McKinley than a Calhoun
President Cleveland was so dissatisfied with the bill that he refused to
=The Income Tax of 1894.=--The advocates of tariff reduction usually
associated with their proposal a tax on incomes. The argument which
tribute laid upon the rest of the country. As an offset they offered a
protection. "We propose," said one of them, "to place a part of the
all upon the consumption of the people." In this spirit the sponsors of
anarchists with their bombs are all instructing the people in the ...
savage in their denunciation of the tax. But all this labor was wasted.
decision was also an index to the diversity of opinion that divided both
parties.
=The Grangers and State Regulation.=--The same uncertainty about the
As to the railways, the first firm and consistent demand for their
seventies, having got control in state legislatures, particularly in
Iowa, Wisconsin, and Illinois, enacted drastic laws prescribing the
maximum charges which companies could make for carrying freight and
passengers. The application of these measures, however, was limited
because the state could not fix the rates for transporting goods and
passengers beyond its own borders. The power of regulating interstate
commerce, under the Constitution, belonged to Congress.
which had been so effective in western legislatures appeared at
interstate rates. In 1887, the pressure became so strong that Congress
created the interstate commerce commission and forbade many abuses on
the part of railways; such as discriminating in charges between one
law was a significant beginning; but it left the main question of
rate-fixing untouched, much to the discontent of farmers and shippers.
=The Sherman Anti-Trust Law of 1890.=--As in the case of the railways,
united in the promotion of measures of this kind. As in the case of the
railways also, the movement to curb the trusts soon had spokesmen at
private affair with which neither the President nor any private citizen
had any particular right to interfere," it was a Republican Congress
that enacted in 1890 the first measure--the Sherman Anti-Trust
Law--directed against great combinations in business. This act declared
or conspiracy in restraint of trade and commerce among the several
states or with foreign nations."
=The Futility of the Anti-Trust Law.=--Whether the Sherman law was
directed against all combinations or merely those which placed an
"unreasonable restraint" on trade and competition was not apparent.
it would operate, or whether it was within the power of Congress to
enact it, have been whistled down the wind in this Senate as idle talk
and the whole effort has been to get some bill headed: 'A bill to punish
President Cleveland, in spite of the constant demand for harsh action
Democrats were prepared for a war on the trusts to the bitter end.
THE MINOR PARTIES AND UNREST
Horace Greeley made his ill-fated excursion into politics, onward, there
parties, stressing issues that appealed mainly to wage-earners and
farmers. Whether they chose to call themselves Labor Reformers,
Greenbackers, or Anti-monopolists, their slogans and their platforms all
pointed in one direction. Even the Prohibitionists, who in 1872 started
on their career with a single issue, the abolition of the liquor
from the administration of Grant to the close of Cleveland's second term
reveals certain notions common to them all. These included among many
others: the earliest possible payment of the national debt; regulation
of the rates of railways and telegraph companies; repeal of the specie
resumption act of 1875; the issue of legal tender notes by the
tax; legislation to take from "land, railroad, money, and other gigantic
corporate monopolies ... the powers they have so corruptly and unjustly
usurped"; popular or direct election of United States Senators; woman
suffrage; and a graduated income tax, "placing the burden of government
on those who can best afford to pay instead of laying it on the farmers
and producers."
=Criticism of the Old Parties.=--To this long program of measures the
sometimes, it must be said, of established institutions of government.
Republican parties as hopelessly and shamelessly corrupt and by reason
Senate," insisted the Greenbackers, "is a body composed largely of
aristocratic millionaires who according to their own party papers
accepted at face value, the Greenbackers believed that the entire
government had passed out of the hands of the people.
cast their lot as a rule with one or the other of the leading parties.
In 1867, however, there grew up among them an association known as the
organized local lodges or "granges" on principles of secrecy and
interests of the farmers. Its political bearings were apparently not
grasped at first by its promoters. Yet, appealing as it did to the most
active and independent spirits among the farmers and gathering to itself
in the hands of leaders more or less involved in politics. Where a few
votes are marshaled together in a democracy, there is power.
=The Greenback Party.=--The first extensive activity of the Grangers was
popularly known as the Greenbackers, favoring a continued re-issue of
votes and fourteen of them were returned to the House of
entered the lists.
The sanguine hopes of the leaders proved to be illusory. The quiet
operations of the resumption act the following year, a revival of
industry from a severe panic which had set in during 1873, the Silver
election of 1880. A still greater drop came four years later and the
party gave up the ghost, its sponsors returning to their former
allegiance or sulking in their tents.
=The Rise of the Populist Party.=--Those leaders of the old parties who
now looked for a happy future unvexed by new factions were doomed to
before there arose two other political specters in the agrarian
sections: the National Farmers' Alliance and Industrial Union,
convention, nominated a candidate for President, and adopted the name of
"People's Party," from which they were known as Populists. Their
platform, in every line, breathed a spirit of radicalism. They declared
silenced; business prostrate; our homes covered with mortgages; and the
toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a
few." Having delivered this sweeping indictment, the Populists put
forward their remedies: the free coinage of silver, a graduated income
tax, postal savings banks, and government ownership of railways and
telegraphs. At the same time they approved the initiative, referendum,
and popular election of Senators, and condemned the use of federal
troops in labor disputes. On this platform, the Populists polled over a
million votes, captured twenty-two presidential electors, and sent a
=Industrial Distress Augments Unrest.=--The four years intervening
between the campaign of 1892 and the next presidential election brought
forth many events which aggravated the ill-feeling expressed in the
silver, gave his powerful support to the gold standard and insisted on
number of his own party. In 1893 a grave industrial crisis fell upon the
land: banks and business houses went into bankruptcy with startling
rapidity; factories were closed; idle men thronged the streets hunting
for work; and the prices of wheat and corn dropped to a ruinous level.
Labor disputes also filled the crowded record. A strike at the Pullman
car works in Chicago spread to the railways. Disorders ensued. President
Altgeld, dispatched troops to the scene of action. The United States
district court at Chicago issued an injunction forbidding the president
For refusing to obey the order, Debs was arrested and imprisoned. With
federal troops in possession of the field, with their leader in jail,
the strikers gave up the battle, defeated but not subdued. To cap the
declared null and void the income tax law just enacted by Congress, thus
THE SOUND MONEY BATTLE OF 1896
=Conservative Men Alarmed.=--Men of conservative thought and leaning in
revolutionary spirit, indeed nothing short of a menace to American
speech before the Supreme Court, "is communistic in its purposes and
tendencies and is defended here upon principles as communistic,
addressed to any political assembly in the world." Mr. Justice Field in
the name of the Court replied: "The present assault upon capital is but
the beginning. It will be but the stepping stone to others larger and
more sweeping till our political conditions will become a war of the
poor against the rich." In declaring the income tax unconstitutional, he
As for free silver, nearly all conservative men were united in calling
it a measure of confiscation and repudiation; an effort of the debtors
to pay their obligations with money worth fifty cents on the dollar; the
climax of villainies openly defended; a challenge to law, order, and
honor.
=The Republicans Come Out for the Gold Standard.=--It was among the
Republicans that this opinion was most widely shared and firmly held. It
was they who picked up the gauge thrown down by the Populists, though a
host of Democrats, like Cleveland and Hill of New York, also battled
against the growing Populist defection in Democratic ranks. When the
Republican national convention assembled in 1896, the die was soon
to use the vigorous language of Mr. Lodge, arrayed itself against "not
when the forces of disorder are loose and the wreckers with their false
lights gather at the shore to lure the ship of state upon the rocks."
Republicans nominated, had voted in Congress for the free coinage of
however, he proved to be a valiant champion, though his major interest
was undoubtedly in the protective tariff. To him nothing was more
reprehensible than attempts "to array class against class, 'the classes
against the masses,' section against section, labor against capital,
'the poor against the rich,' or interest against interest." Such was the
order."
=The Democratic Convention at Chicago.=--Never, save at the great
disruption on the eve of the Civil War, did a Democratic national
opening prayer to the last motion before the house, every act, every
proposal to praise the administration of the Democratic President,
silver, was reported, a veritable storm broke. Senator Hill, trembling
with emotion, protested against the departure from old tests of
Democratic allegiance; against principles that must drive out of the
party men who had grown gray in its service; against revolutionary,
unwise, and unprecedented steps in the history of the party. Senator
in principle between the free coinage of silver--"the confiscation of
one-half of the credits of the nation for the benefit of debtors"--and
justice, all security and repose in the social order."
[Illustration: _Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
WILLIAM J. BRYAN IN 1898]
=The Crown of Thorns Speech.=--The champions of free silver replied in
strident tones. They accused the gold advocates of being the aggressors
who had assailed the labor and the homes of the people. William Jennings
holders of idle capital and the toiling millions. Then he named those
for whom he spoke--the wage-earner, the country lawyer, the small
merchant, the farmer, and the miner. "The man who is employed for wages
man as the merchant of New York. The farmer ... is as much a business
of grain. The miners who go a thousand feet into the earth or climb two
thousand feet upon the cliffs ... are as much business men as the few
financial magnates who in a back room corner the money of the world....
We beg no longer; we entreat no more; we petition no more. We defy
them.... We shall answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to
an orator so completely swayed a multitude; not even Yancey in his
moving eloquence, he espoused the Southern cause against the impending
more, tore the standards from the floor and gathered around the Nebraska
delegation to renew the deafening applause. The platform as reported was
The division was sectional, admittedly sectional--the old combination of
power which Calhoun had so anxiously labored to build up a century
ticket, held a convention at Indianapolis where, with the sanction of
Cleveland, they nominated candidates of their own and endorsed the gold
standard in a forlorn hope.
=The Democratic Platform.=--It was to the call from Chicago that the
Democrats gave heed and the Republicans made answer. The platform on
national banks to issue notes intended to circulate as money on the
ground that it was "in derogation of the Constitution," recalling
duties should be laid "for the purpose of revenue"--Calhoun's doctrine.
In demanding the free coinage of silver, it recurred to the practice
abandoned in 1873. The income tax came next on the program. The platform
strict pursuance of the uniform decisions of the Supreme Court for
The appeal to labor voiced by Mr. Bryan in his "crown of thorns" speech
was reinforced in the platform. "As labor creates the wealth of the
Pullman strike, the passions of which had not yet died away, the
local affairs as a violation of the Constitution of the United States
and a crime against free institutions." A special objection was lodged
against "government by injunction as a new and highly dangerous form of
and rights of citizens, become at once legislators, judges, and
jury in all cases of contempt in labor disputes. Having made this
their standard of battle.
range of its educational activities and the bitterness of its tone all
struggle of 1860. Immense sums of money were contributed to the funds of
both parties. Railway, banking, and other corporations gave generously
pamphlets, posters, and handbills. Every public forum, from the great
Mr. Bryan took the stump himself, visiting all parts of the country in
campaign from his front porch, leaving to an army of well-organized
processions, and monster demonstrations filled the land with politics.
Whole states were polled in advance by the Republicans and the doubtful
voters personally visited by men equipped with arguments and literature.
the election. Men were dismissed from public and private places on
forced out for advocating free silver. The language employed by
state of frenzy, once more showing the lengths to which men could go in
personal and political abuse.
=The Republican Victory.=--The verdict of the nation was decisive.
McKinley received 271 of the 447 electoral votes, and 7,111,000 popular
votes as against Bryan's 6,509,000. The congressional elections were
equally positive although, on account of the composition of the Senate,
the "hold-over" Democrats and Populists still enjoyed a power out of
the Republicans got full control of both houses--a dominion of the
second half of Mr. Taft's administration, when they lost possession of
the House of Representatives. The yoke of indecision was broken. The
party of sound finance and protective tariffs set out upon its lease of
power with untroubled assurance.
REPUBLICAN MEASURES AND RESULTS
=The Gold Standard and the Tariff.=--Yet strange as it may seem, the
standard for the national currency. Not until 1900 did they take that
positive step. In his first inaugural President McKinley, as if still
uncertain in his own mind or fearing a revival of the contest just
closed, placed the tariff, not the money question, in the forefront.
"The people have decided," he said, "that such legislation should be had
development of our country." Protection for American industries,
secured, but not until then, we can enter upon changes in our fiscal
laws." As the Republicans had only forty-six of the ninety Senators, and
discretion exercised by the President in selecting the tariff for
congressional debate was the better part of valor.
Congress gave heed to the warning. Under the direction of Nelson P.
Dingley, whose name was given to the bill, a tariff measure levying the
and driven through the House of Representatives. The opposition
concessions in favor of that section; but the duties on sugar, tin,
steel, lumber, hemp, and in fact all of the essential commodities
[Illustration: _Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
=Growth of Combinations.=--The years that followed the enactment of the
Dingley law were, whatever the cause, the most prosperous the country
had witnessed for many a decade. Industries of every kind were soon
than ever to the markets of the world. Coincident with this progress was
the organization of the greatest combinations and trusts the world had
$65,000,000; in the same year the Standard Oil Company with a capital of
over one hundred millions took the place of the old trust; and the
Before another twelvemonth had elapsed all previous corporate financing
was reduced to small proportions by the flotation of the United States
Steel Corporation with a capital of more than a billion dollars, an
finance were more or less intimately associated. To use the language of
an eminent authority: "They are all allied and intertwined by their
other with the Rockefellers. The Vanderbilts are closely allied with the
the trusts to be made up of a network of large and small capitalists,
being appendages to or parts of the greater groups which are themselves
dependent on and allied with the two mammoth or Rockefeller and Morgan
triumphant business enterprise drawn by a financier within a few years
after the memorable campaign of 1896.
America had become one of the first workshops of the world. It was, by
of the most powerful and energetic leaders in the struggle of the giants
for the business of the earth. The capital of the Steel Corporation
alone was more than ten times the total national debt which the apostles
overflowing, was ready for new worlds to conquer.
J.L. Laughlin, _Bimetallism in the United States_.
A.B. Hepburn, _History of Coinage and Currency in the United States_.
F.H. Dixon, _State Railroad Control_.
W.Z. Ripley (editor), _Trusts, Pools, and Corporations_.
J.B. Clark, _The Control of Trusts_.
=Questions=
2. Why is a fall in prices a loss to farmers and a gain to holders of
fixed investments?
3. Explain the theory that the quantity of money determines the prices
parity?
5. What special conditions favored a fall in silver between 1870 and
1896?
6. Describe some of the measures taken to raise the value of silver.
7. Explain the relation between the tariff and the income tax in 1894.
8. How did it happen that the farmers led in regulating railway rates?
9. Give the terms of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act. What was its immediate
effect?
10. Name some of the minor parties. Enumerate the reforms they
advocated.
11. Describe briefly the experiments of the farmers in politics.
12. How did industrial conditions increase unrest?
13. Why were conservative men disturbed in the early nineties?
14. Explain the Republican position in 1896.
15. Give Mr. Bryan's doctrines in 1896. Enumerate the chief features of
their victory in 1896?
=Research Topics=
=Greenbacks and Resumption.=--Dewey, _Financial History of the United
_Documentary Source Book of American History_, pp. 446, 566; Hart,
_American History Told by Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 531-533; Rhodes,
_History of the United States_, Vol. VIII, pp. 97-101.
=Free Silver and the Campaign of 1896.=--Dewey, _National Problems_
=Tariff Revision.=--Dewey, _Financial History_, Sections 167, 180, 181,
187, 192, 196; Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 518-525; Rhodes,
_History_, Vol. VIII, pp. 168-179, 346-351, 418-422.
=Federal Regulation of Railways.=--Dewey, _National Problems_, pp.
_Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 521-523; Rhodes, _History_, Vol. VIII,
pp. 288-292.
Series), pp. 20-37, 177-191, 208-223.
York State, 1920), pp. 137-142.
It has now become a fashion, sanctioned by wide usage and by eminent
historians, to speak of America, triumphant over Spain and possessed of
that from the fateful moment in March, 1775, when Edmund Burke unfolded
invincible America, down to the settlement at Versailles in 1919 closing
influencing by its example, by its institutions, by its wealth, trade,
and arms the course of international affairs. And it should be said also
that neither in the field of commercial enterprise nor in that of
diplomacy has it been wanting in spirit or ingenuity.
When John Hay, Secretary of State, heard that an American citizen,
American commissioner, Caleb Cushing, taking advantage of the British
Opium War on China, negotiated with the Celestial Empire a successful
commercial treaty? Did he not then exultantly exclaim: "The laws of the
the battle of Manila Bay in 1898, that Commodore Perry with an adequate
the nations of the earth in the opening of that empire to the trade of
the Occident? Nor is it inappropriate in this connection to recall the
fact that the Monroe Doctrine celebrates in 1923 its hundredth
=French Intrigues in Mexico Blocked.=--Between the war for the union and
little while after the civil conflict came to a close, it was called
upon to deal with a dangerous situation created in Mexico by the
had fallen into disorder through the strife of the Liberal and the
Observing the United States heavily involved in its own problems, the
great powers, England, France, and Spain, decided in the autumn of 1861
into an agreement to enforce the claims of their citizens against Mexico
and to protect their subjects residing in that republic. They invited
prepared for a combined military and naval demonstration on their own
sinister purposes of Napoleon, withdrew their troops and left the field
to him.
growth of the United States and dreamed of establishing in the Western
hemisphere an imperial power to offset the American republic.
Intervention to collect debts was only a cloak for his deeper designs.
Throwing off that guise in due time, he made the Archduke Maximilian, a
brother of the ruler of Austria, emperor in Mexico, and surrounded his
throne by French soldiers, in spite of all protests.
This insolent attack upon the Mexican republic, deeply resented in the
United States, was allowed to drift in its course until 1865. At that
juncture General Sheridan was dispatched to the Mexican border with a
expel the French from this continent. The Secretary of State, Seward,
counseled negotiation first, and, applying the Monroe Doctrine, was able
in the purchase of Alaska from Russia. The treaty of cession, signed on
March 30, 1867, added to the United States a domain of nearly six
three-fourths the size of the Louisiana purchase. Though it was a
distant colony separated from our continental domain by a thousand miles
of water, no question of "imperialism" or "colonization foreign to
American doctrines" seems to have been raised at the time. The treaty
was ratified promptly by the Senate. The purchase price, $7,200,000, was
formulated the treaty, rejoiced, as he afterwards said, that he had kept
triumph, Seward turned to the increase of American power in another
direction. He negotiated, with Denmark, a treaty providing for the
purchase of the islands of St. John and St. Thomas in the West Indies,
strategic points in the Caribbean for sea power. This project, long
was not yet prepared to exercise colonial dominion over other races.
Undaunted by the misadventure in Caribbean policies, President Grant
had long been in a state of general disorder. In 1869 a treaty of
annexation was concluded with its president. The document Grant
transmitted to the Senate with his cordial approval, only to have it
rejected. Not at all changed in his opinion by the outcome of his
message to Congress he referred to it, saying that time had only proved
the wisdom of his early course. The addition of Santo Domingo to the
American sphere of protection was the work of a later generation. The
=The _Alabama_ Claims Arbitrated.=--Indeed, it had in hand a far more
permitted Confederate cruisers, including the famous _Alabama_, built in
states. This action, denounced at the time by our government as a grave
breach of neutrality as well as a grievous injury to American citizens,
led first to remonstrances and finally to repeated claims for damages
done to American ships and goods. For a long time Great Britain was
firm. Her foreign secretary denied all obligations in the premises,
adding somewhat curtly that "he wished to say once for all that Her
Majesty's government disclaimed any responsibility for the losses and
demand. Finally he secured from the British government in 1871 the
between the two countries.
Switzerland, and after a long and careful review of the arguments on
both sides awarded to the United States the lump sum of $15,500,000 to
were large, unquestionably larger than strict justice required and it is
not surprising that the decision excited much adverse comment in
swept away at once a great cloud of ill-feeling in America. Moreover,
the spectacle of two powerful nations choosing the way of peaceful
arbitration to settle an angry dispute seemed a happy, if illusory, omen
=Samoa.=--If the Senate had its doubts at first about the wisdom of
Commander Meade, of the United States navy, alive to the importance of
Pago Pago as a naval base, was six years later changed into a formal
German emperor, seizing as a pretext a quarrel between his consul in the
islands and a native king, laid claim to an interest in the Samoan
southern seas so near to Australia, was not content to stand aside. So
it happened that all three countries sent battleships to the Samoan
waters, threatening a crisis that was fortunately averted by friendly
challenging American sea power then and there, the presence of British
ships must have dispelled that dream.
powers in 1889 undertook a protectorate over the islands. But joint
control proved unsatisfactory. There was constant friction between the
to dispute, the plan had to be abandoned at the end of ten years.
finest harbors in the Pacific, to the intense delight of the American
navy, passed permanently under American dominion. Another triumph in
America, as well as in those with the distant Pacific, the diplomacy of
taken a lively interest in the contest. In 1895 President Cleveland saw
that Great Britain would yield none of her claims. After hearing the
arguments of Venezuela, his Secretary of State, Richard T. Olney, in a
note none too conciliatory, asked the British government whether it was
willing to arbitrate the points in controversy. This inquiry he
permit any European power to contest its mastery in this hemisphere.
"The United States," said the Secretary, "is practically sovereign on
this continent and its fiat is law upon the subjects to which it
confines its interposition.... Its infinite resources, combined with its
invulnerable against any or all other powers."
The reply evoked from the British government by this strong statement
stretched by interpretation, was not binding in international law; the
dispute with Venezuela was a matter of interest merely to the parties
involved; and arbitration of the question was impossible. This response
called forth President Cleveland's startling message of 1895. He asked
Congress to create a commission authorized to ascertain by researches
the true boundary between Venezuela and British Guiana. He added that it
would be the duty of this country "to resist by every means in its
appropriation by Great Britain of any lands or the exercise of
governmental jurisdiction over any territory which, after investigation,
of this statement he thoroughly understood. He declared that he was
to be deplored, was not comparable to "a supine submission to wrong and
injustice and the consequent loss of national self-respect and honor."
[Illustration: GROVER CLEVELAND]
The note of defiance which ran through this message, greeted by shrill
cries of enthusiasm in many circles, was viewed in other quarters as a
portent of war. Responsible newspapers in both countries spoke of an
bellicose section of the London press, deplored the incident,
courteously replied in the affirmative to a request for assistance in
issue be submitted to arbitration. The outcome of this somewhat perilous
dispute contributed not a little to Cleveland's reputation as "a
sterling representative of the true American spirit." This was not
diminished when the tribunal of arbitration found that Great Britain was
on the whole right in her territorial claims against Venezuela.
events to consider the annexation of the Hawaiian Islands in the
mid-Pacific. For more than half a century American missionaries had been
active in converting the natives to the Christian faith and enterprising
American business men had been developing the fertile sugar plantations.
power and watched with anxiety any developments likely to bring them
under some other Dominion.
The country at large was indifferent, however, until 1893, when a
revolution, headed by Americans, broke out, ending in the overthrow of
followed by a demand from the new Hawaiian government for annexation to
the United States. President Harrison looked with favor on the proposal,
approval. There it still rested when his term of office was brought to a
close.
Harrison's successor, Cleveland, it was well known, had doubts about the
conclusion that "the revolution in the island kingdom had been
accomplished by the improper use of the armed forces of the United
queen to her throne." Such being his matured conviction, though the
facts upon which he rested it were warmly controverted, he could do
nothing but withdraw the treaty from the Senate and close the incident.
carried out in a way that impugned the motives of a Republican
President, was nothing less than "a betrayal of American interests." In
policy should be at all times firm, vigorous, and dignified and all our
interests in the Western hemisphere carefully watched and guarded. The
Hawaiian Islands should be controlled by the United States and no
foreign power should be permitted to interfere with them." There was no
mistaking this view of the issue. As the vote in the election gave
popular sanction to Republican policies, Congress by a joint resolution,
later conferred upon them the ordinary territorial form of government.
CUBA AND THE SPANISH WAR
=Early American Relations with Cuba.=--The year that brought Hawaii
finally under the American flag likewise drew to a conclusion another
remnants of the once glorious Spanish empire--the island of Cuba.
For a century the Department of State had kept an anxious eye upon this
base of power, knowing full well that both France and England, already
Cuba. In the administration of President Fillmore they had united in
proposing to the United States a tripartite treaty guaranteeing Spain in
the test of all the years that followed; namely, that the affair was one
between Spain and the United States alone.
of bringing Cuba into the union to offset the free states. An
opportunity to announce their purposes publicly was afforded in 1854 by
a controversy over the seizure of an American ship by Cuban authorities.
On that occasion three American ministers abroad, stationed at Madrid,
her geographical position, formed a part of the United States, that
possession by a foreign power was inimical to American interests, and
that an effort should be made to purchase the island from Spain. In case
the owner refused to sell, they concluded, with a menacing flourish, "by
every law, human and divine, we shall be justified in wresting it from
Spain if we possess the power." This startling proclamation to the world
was promptly disowned by the United States government.
A SIGHT TOO BAD
France."]
=Revolutions in Cuba.=--For nearly twenty years afterwards the Cuban
question rested. Then it was revived in another form during President
destructive revolt against Spanish officials. For ten years--1868-78--a
guerrilla warfare raged in the island. American citizens, by virtue of
their ancient traditions of democracy, naturally sympathized with a war
for independence and self-government. Expeditions to help the insurgents
were fitted out secretly in American ports. Arms and supplies were
lives and property in the revolutionary area, and similar matters kept
revolutionary movement. The contest between the rebels and the Spanish
troops, marked by extreme cruelty and a total disregard for life and
the land with fire and sword. By a proclamation of November 6, 1895, he
the ruthless Spanish general, Weyler, who concentrated the inhabitants
from rural regions into military camps, where they died by the hundreds
of disease and starvation. Stories of the atrocities, bad enough in
simple form, became lurid when transmuted into American news and deeply
moved the sympathies of the American people. Sermons were preached about
Spanish misdeeds; orators demanded that the Cubans be sustained "in
their heroic struggle for independence"; newspapers, scouting the
[Illustration: _Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
CUBAN REVOLUTIONISTS]
a resolution of Congress in favor of giving to the Cubans the rights of
belligerents. Anxious to bring order to the distracted island, he
tendered to Spain the good offices of the United States as mediator in
the contest--a tender rejected by the Spanish government with the broad
to the unlawful aid in money, arms, and supplies, afforded to the
to his successor, President McKinley.
=Republican Policies.=--The Republicans in 1897 found themselves in a
position to employ that "firm, vigorous, and dignified" foreign policy
which they had approved in their platform. They had declared: "The
protect the property or lives of resident American citizens or to comply
with its treaty obligations, we believe that the government of the
United States should actively use its influence and good offices to
amounted by this time to more than fifty million dollars; the commerce
with the island reached more than one hundred millions annually; and the
sixteen millions. To the pleas of humanity which made such an effective
=President McKinley Negotiates.=--In the face of the swelling tide of
popular opinion in favor of quick, drastic, and positive action,
McKinley chose first the way of diplomacy. A short time after his
against its policies in Cuba, thus opening a game of thrust and parry
notes were the recall of the obnoxious General Weyler, the appointment
policy of concentrating civilians in military camps, and finally a
American minister at Madrid, General Woodford, was convinced that firm
and patient pressure would have resulted in the final surrender of Cuba
by the Spanish government.
President of the United States, was filched from the mails and passed
private correspondence. The Spanish government was compelled to recall
De Lome, thus officially condemning his conduct.
At this point a far more serious crisis put the pacific relations of the
_Maine_, riding in the harbor of Havana, was blown up and sunk, carrying
of Spanish officials, profoundly stirred an already furious nation.
When, on March 21, a commission of inquiry reported that the ill-fated
ship had been blown up by a submarine mine which had in turn set off
some of the ship's magazines, the worst suspicions seemed confirmed. If
independence, he was now met by the vehement cry: "Remember the
_Maine_!"
=Spanish Concessions.=--Still the State Department, under McKinley's
steady hand, pursued the path of negotiation, Spain proving more pliable
On the 4th, McKinley, evidently convinced that promises did not mean
performances, instructed our minister at Madrid to warn the Spanish
government that as no effective armistice had been offered to the
excited all the European powers. The Pope took an active interest in the
crisis. France and Germany, foreseeing from long experience in world
reasonably asked.
which have never yet been fully explained--McKinley ignored the final
program of concessions presented by Spain. At the very moment when his
his course and launched the country into the war by sending to Congress
his militant message of April 11, 1898. Without making public the last
end of his effort and the cause was in the hands of Congress. Humanity,
American commerce and business, the inability of Spain to bring about
permanent peace in the island--these were the grounds for action that
establishing a stable government in Cuba. They were sufficient for a
public already straining at the leash.
=The Resolution of Congress.=--There was no doubt of the outcome when
the issue was withdrawn from diplomacy and placed in charge of Congress.
Resolutions were soon introduced into the House of Representatives
authorizing the President to employ armed force in securing peace and
order in the island and "establishing by the free action of the people
thereof a stable and independent government of their own." To the form
and spirit of this proposal the Democrats and Populists took exception.
In the Senate, where they were stronger, their position had to be
reckoned with by the narrow Republican majority. As the resolution
finally read, the independence of Cuba was recognized; Spain was called
upon to relinquish her authority and withdraw from the island; and the
the resolutions into effect. Furthermore the United States disclaimed
control over said island except for the pacification thereof." Final
=War and Victory.=--Startling events then followed in swift succession.
The navy, as a result in no small measure of the alertness of Theodore
Spanish fleet, marking the doom of Spanish dominion in the Philippines.
On July 3, the Spanish fleet under Admiral Cervera, in attempting to
Commodore Schley. On July 17, Santiago, invested by American troops
under General Shafter and shelled by the American ships, gave up the
struggle. On July 25 General Miles landed in Porto Rico. On August 13,
General Merritt and Admiral Dewey carried Manila by storm. The war was
facts. As early as July 26, 1898, acting through the French ambassador,
October 1, the commissioners of the two countries met at Paris to bring
=Peace Negotiations.=--When the day for the first session of the
conquest in the Pacific.
The march of events, he added, had imposed new duties on the country.
"Incidental to our tenure in the Philippines," he said, "is the
commercial opportunity to which American statesmanship cannot be
enlargement of American trade." On this ground he directed the
commissioners to accept not less than the cession of the island of
Luzon, the chief of the Philippine group, with its harbor of Manila. It
was not until the latter part of October that he definitely instructed
of Luzon alone could not be justified "on political, commercial, or
humanitarian grounds." This departure from the letter of the peace
heaviness of heart that they surrendered the last sign of Spain's
ancient dominion in the far Pacific.
upon, embraced the following terms: the independence of Cuba; the
cession of Porto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines to the United States;
the settlement of claims filed by the citizens of both countries; the
issue was in the hands of the Senate where the Democrats and the
two-thirds vote for ratification.
=The Contest in America over the Treaty of Peace.=--The publication of
colonies directed the shifting tides of public opinion into two distinct
channels: support of the policy and opposition to it. The trend in
Republican leadership, long in the direction marked out by the treaty,
now came into the open. Perhaps a majority of the men highest in the
"The only question in my mind is how far it is now possible for us to
and frantic attack now going on in the press against the whole
Philippine transaction. Andrew Carnegie really seems to be off his
will applaud the resolution that has been reached and you will return in
the role of conquering heroes with your 'brows bound with oak.'"
Senator Beveridge of Indiana and Senator Platt of Connecticut, accepting
the verdict of history as the proof of manifest destiny, called for
unquestioning support of the administration in its final step. "Every
expansion is the history of our nation's progress and glory. It is a
has given us the opportunity to extend our influence, our institutions,
and our civilization into regions hitherto closed to us, rather than
many a stanch Republican joining with the majority of Democrats in
denouncing the treaty as a departure from the ideals of the republic.
Senator Vest introduced in the Senate a resolution that "under the
Constitution of the United States, no power is given to the federal
Government to acquire territory to be held and governed permanently as
colonies." Senator Hoar, of Massachusetts, whose long and honorable
career gave weight to his lightest words, inveighed against the whole
procedure and to the end of his days believed that the new drift into
forgotten the use of the vocabulary of liberty. They talk about giving
are fitted for.' 'We shall give them a better government than they had
before.' Why, Mr. President, that one phrase conveys to a free man and a
free people the most stinging of insults. In that little phrase, as in a
seed, is contained the germ of all despotism and of all tyranny.
Government is not a gift. Free government is not to be given by all the
blended powers of earth and heaven. It is a birthright. It belongs, as
President McKinley said, to human nature itself."
Democrats and Populists were especially recalcitrant. Mr. Bryan hurried
to Washington and brought his personal influence to bear in favor of
speedy action. Patriotism required ratification, it was said in one
resolution declaring that the policy to be adopted in the Philippines
was still an open question, leaving to the future, in this way, the
possibility of retracing their steps.
=The Attitude of England.=--The Spanish war, while accomplishing the
exercised a profound influence on the drift of opinion among European
powers. In England, sympathy with the United States was from the first
positive and outspoken. "The state of feeling here," wrote Mr. Hay, then
the evidences of it come to me. The royal family by habit and tradition
consistent with propriety--sympathy. Among the political leaders on both
other fellows' shall not seem more friendly."
doubt of the continental situation, said in a political address at the
establish and maintain bonds of permanent unity with our kinsmen across
be, even war would be cheaply purchased if, in a great and noble cause,
the Stars and Stripes and the Union Jack should wave together over an
continent," which was another way of expressing the hope that the
support Spain was more than possible, removed all fears as to the
ambassador, coolly remarked that it was "the sudden appearance of
arms"; but the net result in keeping the field free for an easy triumph
of American arms was none the less appreciated in Washington where,
AMERICAN POLICIES IN THE PHILIPPINES AND THE ORIENT
=The Filipino Revolt against American Rule.=--In the sphere of domestic
politics, as well as in the field of foreign relations, the outcome of
relations with the outlying dominions. These were furthermore
complicated in the very beginning by the outbreak of an insurrection
against American sovereignty in the Philippines. The leader of the
overthrowing Spanish dominion, and he had assumed, apparently without
warrant, that independence would be the result of the joint operations.
occurred a slight collision between his men and some American soldiers.
dwindled into a vexatious guerrilla warfare lasting three years and
costing heavily in men and money. Atrocities were committed by the
were without terror to men accustomed to fighting like savages. In vain
established in the islands would be designed "not for our satisfaction
or for the expression of our theoretical views, but for the happiness,
short of military pressure could bring the warring revolutionists to
=Attacks on Republican "Imperialism."=--The Filipino insurrection,
Senator Hoar was more than usually caustic in his indictment of the new
course. The revolt against American rule did but convince him of the
in the Senate, "or in the press which supports it and them, a single
Philippine Islands, or of a desire to make known to the people of the
United States the truth of the case.... The catchwords, the cries, the
pithy and pregnant phrases of which their speech is full, all mean
gentlemen who will rise in his place and affirm that if he were a
would not despise them if they were to do otherwise. So much at least
they owe of respect to the dead and buried history--the dead and buried
history so far as they can slay and bury it--of their country." In the
way of practical suggestions, the Senator offered as a solution of the
problem: the recognition of independence, assistance in establishing
of freedom to the islands.
sanguinary struggle to maintain American supremacy, such talk was more
the practical obstacles in the way of uniform self-government for a
incidents of the revolt and its repression, they admitted, were painful
enough; but still nothing as compared with the chaos that would follow
the attempt of a people who had never had experience in such matters to
set up and sustain democratic institutions. They preferred rather the
gradual process of fitting the inhabitants of the islands for
self-government. This course, in their eyes, though less poetic, was
more in harmony with the ideals of humanity. Having set out upon it,
they pursued it steadfastly to the end. First, they applied force
A PHILIPPINE HOME]
=The Boxer Rebellion in China.=--For a nation with a world-wide trade,
for new markets, isolation was obviously impossible. Never was this
the powers of Europe in a military expedition and a diplomatic
settlement. The Boxers, a Chinese association, had for some time carried
foreigners who, they said, "were lacerating China like tigers." In the
summer of 1900 the revolt flamed up in deeds of cruelty. Missionaries
and traders were murdered in the provinces; foreign legations were
stoned; the German ambassador, one of the most cordially despised
a frightful war of extermination had begun. In the month of June nearly
besieged in the British quarters in Peking under constant fire of
=Intervention in China.=--Nothing but the arrival of armed forces, made
half a century, the imperial powers of Europe had been carving up the
mining rights, ports, and commercial privileges at the expense of the
huge but helpless victim. The United States alone among the great
refrained from seizing Chinese territory or ports. Moreover, the
with fairness, to respect her territorial integrity, and to give her
equal trading privileges with all nations.
=The American Policy of the "Open Door."=--In the autumn of 1899,
Secretary Hay had addressed to London, Berlin, Rome, Paris, Tokyo, and
St. Petersburg his famous note on the "open door" policy in China. In
this document he proposed that existing treaty ports and vested
interests of the several foreign countries should be respected; that
the Chinese government should be permitted to extend its tariffs to all
ports held by alien powers except the few free ports; and that there
should be no discrimination in railway and port charges among the
citizens of foreign countries operating in the empire. To these
principles the governments addressed by Mr. Hay, finally acceded with
evident reluctance.
[Illustration: AMERICAN DOMINIONS IN THE PACIFIC]
On this basis he then proposed the settlement that had to follow the
Boxer uprising. "The policy of the Government of the United States," he
said to the great powers, in the summer of 1900, "is to seek a solution
world that the United States would not join in a scramble to punish the
Chinese by carving out more territory. "The moment we acted," said Mr.
and the German government, which is generally brutal but seldom silly,
recovered its senses, and climbed down off its perch."
In taking this position, the Secretary of State did but reflect the
opinion of the United States would justify this government in taking
part in the great game of spoliation now going on." Heavy damages were
collected by the European powers from China for the injuries inflicted
upon their citizens by the Boxers; but the United States, finding the
sum awarded in excess of the legitimate claims, returned the balance in
the form of a fund to be applied to the education of Chinese students in
American universities. "I would rather be, I think," said Mr. Hay, "the
affections of the Chinese people and, in the long run, as he remarked
himself, safeguarded "our great commercial interests in that Empire."
=Imperialism in the Presidential Campaign of 1900.=--It is not strange
the questions raised by the Spanish War became one of the first issues
in the presidential campaign of 1900. Anticipating attacks from every
position in clear and ringing phrases: "In accepting by the treaty of
No other course was possible than to destroy Spain's sovereignty
created our responsibility, before the world and with the unorganized
authority could not be less than our responsibility, and wherever
to maintain its authority, to put down armed insurrection, and to confer
their ticket, the Republican convention, in a whirlwind of enthusiasm,
nominated for the vice presidency, against his protest, Theodore
Roosevelt, the governor of New York and the hero of the Rough Riders, so
The Democrats, as expected, picked up the gauntlet thrown down with such
defiance by the Republicans. Mr. Bryan, whom they selected as their
program" of the Republican administration. The Democrats denounced the
surrender our civilization or to convert the Republic into an empire, we
favor an immediate declaration of the Nation's purpose to give to the
third, protection from outside interference.... The greedy commercialism
sordid and unworthy plea fails when brought to the test of facts. The
expense of many millions has already cost more than any possible profit
that could accrue from the entire Philippine trade for years to come....
We oppose militarism. It means conquest abroad and intimidation and
oppression at home. It means the strong arm which has ever been fatal to
free institutions. It is what millions of our citizens have fled from in
Europe. It will impose upon our peace-loving people a large standing
army, an unnecessary burden of taxation, and would be a constant menace
cast for McKinley was larger and that cast for Bryan smaller than in the
Lincoln, Garfield, and McKinley, three of the gentlest of men, all risen
to the head of the state and all done to death by assassins." On
September 14, 1901, the Vice President, Theodore Roosevelt, took up the
lines of power that had fallen from the hands of his distinguished
chief, promising to continue "absolutely unbroken" the policies he had
inherited.
SUMMARY OF NATIONAL GROWTH AND WORLD POLITICS
extension of the railways, the development of the Great West, and the
triumph of industry and business enterprise. In the South many of the
great plantations were broken up and sold in small farms, crops were
diversified, the small farming class was raised in the scale of social
timber, and other resources were brought into use. In the West the free
arable land was practically exhausted by 1890 under the terms of the
Homestead Act; gold, silver, copper, coal and other minerals were
discovered in abundance; numerous rail connections were formed with the
industrial system, which had risen and flourished before the Civil War,
wage-earners rose into the tens of millions. The immigration of aliens
goods became a competitor of Europe in the markets of the earth.
In the sphere of politics, the period witnessed the recovery of white
supremacy in the South; the continued discussion of the old questions,
such as the currency, the tariff, and national banking; and the
injection of new issues like the trusts and labor problems. As of old,
Russia; attempts were made to extend American influence in the Caribbean
region; a Samoan island was brought under the flag; and the Hawaiian
islands were annexed. The Monroe Doctrine was applied with vigor in the
Assistance was given to the Cubans in their revolutionary struggle
of politics. In the direction of affairs, the Republicans took the
W.F. Reddaway, _The Monroe Doctrine_.
J.H. Latane, _The United States and Spanish America_.
F.E. Chadwick, _Spanish-American War_.
M.M. Kalaw, _Self-Government in the Philippines_.
L.S. Rowe, _The United States and Porto Rico_.
F.E. Chadwick, _The Relations of the United States and Spain_.
W.R. Shepherd, _Latin America_; _Central and South America_.
=Questions=
3. Review the early history of our interest in the Caribbean.
4. Amid what circumstances was the Monroe Doctrine applied in
5. Give the causes that led to the war with Spain.
6. Tell the leading events in that war.
7. What was the outcome as far as Cuba was concerned? The outcome for
9. Describe McKinley's colonial policy.
12. Was this expansion a departure from our traditions?
13. What events led to foreign intervention in China?
=Research Topics=
=Hawaii and Venezuela.=--Dewey, _National Problems_ (American Nation
Series), pp. 279-313; Macdonald, _Documentary Source Book_, pp. 600-602;
Nation Series), pp. 3-28; Macdonald, _Documentary Source Book_, pp.
597-598; Roosevelt, _Autobiography_, pp. 223-277; Haworth, _The United
pp. 573-578.
=The War with Spain.=--Elson, _History of the United States_, pp.
=Terms of Peace with Spain.=--Latane, pp. 63-81; Macdonald, pp. 602-608;
Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 588-590.
=The Philippine Insurrection.=--Latane, pp. 82-99.
=Imperialism as a Campaign Issue.=--Latane, pp. 120-132; Haworth, pp.
257-277; Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 604-611.
=Biographical Studies.=--William McKinley, M.A. Hanna, John Hay;
W.R. Shafter, Joseph Wheeler, and H.W. Lawton.
=General Analysis of American Expansion.=--_Syllabus in History_ (New
CHAPTER XXI
THE EVOLUTION OF REPUBLICAN POLICIES (1901-13)
to a new generation and a leader of a new type recalling, if comparisons
Roosevelt was brusque, hearty, restless, and fond of action--"a young
fellow of infinite dash and originality," as John Hay remarked of him;
combining the spirit of his old college, Harvard, with the breezy
a new book, a diplomatic riddle, or a novel theory of history or
of practical politics. Coming upon the political scene in the early
eighties, he had associated himself with the reformers in the Republican
party; but he was no Mugwump. From the first he vehemently preached the
doctrine of party loyalty; if beaten in the convention, he voted the
straight ticket in the election. For twenty years he adhered to this
of the metropolitan police force, as federal civil service commissioner
President McKinley, and as governor of the Empire state. Political
managers of the old school spoke of him as "brilliant but erratic"; they
soon found him equal to the shrewdest in negotiation and action.
[Illustration: _Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Canal, was a heritage from his predecessor. The idea of a water route
across the isthmus, long a dream of navigators, had become a living
it had to undo the Clayton-Bulwer treaty, made with Great Britain in
1850, providing for the construction of the canal under joint
supervision. This was finally effected by the Hay-Pauncefote treaty of
there should be no discriminations against other nations in the matter
This accomplished, it was necessary to decide just where the canal
location. Another group favored cutting the way through Panama after
direction of De Lesseps, the hero of the Suez Canal, had made a costly
failure some twenty years before. After a heated argument over the
merits of the two plans, preference was given to the Panama route. As
the isthmus was then a part of Colombia, President Roosevelt proceeded
Colombian rulers," he exclaimed, "than you could nail jelly to a wall."
He was spared the necessity by a timely revolution. On November 3, 1903,
Panama renounced its allegiance to Colombia and three days later the
United States recognized its independence.
DEEPEST EXCAVATED PORTION OF PANAMA CANAL, SHOWING GOLD HILL ON
This amazing incident was followed shortly by the signature of a treaty
the French concern were then bought, and the final details settled. A
government directly instead of by private contractors was adopted.
that had made Panama a plague spot. Finally, in 1904, as the President
said, "the dirt began to fly." After surmounting formidable
1913 joined the waters of the Atlantic and the Pacific. Nearly eight
thousand miles were cut off the sea voyage from New York to San
Francisco. If any were inclined to criticize President Roosevelt for
recognized the Panama revolutionists, their attention was drawn to the
magnificent outcome of the affair. Notwithstanding the treaty with Great
Britain, Congress passed a tolls bill discriminating in rates in favor
of American ships. It was only on the urgent insistence of President
=The Conclusion of the Russo-Japanese War.=--The applause which greeted
President Roosevelt's sympathies were mainly with the Japanese, although
he observed the proprieties of neutrality. At all events, Secretary Hay
wrote in his diary on New Year's Day, 1905, that the President was
"quite firm in his view that we cannot permit Japan to be robbed a
second time of her victory," referring to the fact that Japan, ten years
Russia, Germany, and France to forego the fruits of conquest.
Whatever the President's personal feelings may have been, he was aware
heavy burden of debt. At a suggestion from Tokyo, he invited both
belligerents in the summer of 1905 to join in a peace conference. The
celerity of their reply was aided by the pressure of European bankers,
who had already come to a substantial agreement that the war must stop.
After some delay, Portsmouth, New Hampshire, was chosen as the meeting
place for the spokesmen of the two warring powers. Roosevelt presided
over the opening ceremonies with fine urbanity, thoroughly enjoying the
justly earned honor of being for the moment at the center of the world's
treaty of peace and amity.
Russo-Japanese settlement but not less important was a diplomatic
passage-at-arms with Germany over the Monroe Doctrine. This clash grew
negotiations, England and Germany, in December 1901, sent battleships to
While unwilling to stand between a Latin-American country and its
creditors, President Roosevelt was determined that debt collecting
the milder course. The President, learning of this refusal, called the
German ambassador to the White House and informed him in very precise
terms that, unless the Imperial German Government consented to
arbitrate, Admiral Dewey would be ordered to the scene with instructions
and no answer came from Berlin. Not baffled, the President again took
stated in language admitting of but one meaning that, unless within
forty-eight hours the Emperor consented to arbitration, American
waters. The hint was sufficient. The Kaiser accepted the proposal and
the President, with the fine irony of diplomacy, complimented him
the Monroe Doctrine this action meant that the United States, while not
permanent occupation of Latin-American territory.
=The Santo Domingo Affair.=--The same issue was involved in a
after the finances of the embarrassed debtor, they would resort to armed
coercion. What was the United States to do? The danger of having some
European power strongly intrenched in Santo Domingo was too imminent to
notwithstanding strong opposition in the Senate was able, in 1907, to
effect a treaty arrangement which placed Dominican finances under
In the course of the debate over this settlement, a number of
interesting questions arose. It was pertinently asked whether the
American navy should be used to help creditors collect their debts
anywhere in Latin-America. It was suggested also that no sanction should
to collect private claims. Opponents of President Roosevelt's policy,
and they were neither few nor insignificant, urged that such matters
commissions for arbitration. To this the answer was made that the United
position of the administration was very clearly stated by President
go to war to prevent a foreign government from collecting a just debt;
on the other hand, it is very inadvisable to permit any foreign power to
take possession, even temporarily, of the customs houses of an American
republic in order to enforce the payment of its obligations; for such a
escape from these alternatives may at any time be that we must
ourselves undertake to bring about some arrangement by which so much as
negative. It denied to European powers a certain liberty of operation in
and his part in bringing the Russo-Japanese War to a close naturally
of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. The subject was
the Czar, Nicholas II, fated to die in one of the terrible holocausts
which he helped to bring upon mankind, who summoned the delegates of the
nations in the first Hague Peace Conference in 1899. The conference did
nothing to reduce military burdens or avoid wars but it did recognize
the right of friendly nations to offer the services of mediation to
countries at war and did establish a Court at the Hague for the
Encouraged by this experiment, feeble as it was, President Roosevelt in
1904 proposed a second conference, yielding to the Czar the honor of
issuing the call. At this great international assembly, held at the
Hague in 1907, the representatives of the United States proposed a plan
armaments, likewise proposed in the conference, was again deferred. In
the "pacific" intentions of most of the powers assembled.
conferences, Roosevelt the following year (1908) made an imposing
display of American naval power by sending a fleet of sixteen
critics claimed, a "mere boyish flourish." President Roosevelt knew how
that no country could have a wide empire of trade and dominion without
force adequate to sustain it. The voyage around the world therefore
served a double purpose. It interested his own country in the naval
program of the government, and it reminded other powers that the
international rivalries.
COLONIAL ADMINISTRATION
were to control the development of Porto Rico and the Philippines. The
self-government, and commercial improvement. The only remaining question
of importance, to use the popular phrase,--"Does the Constitution follow
the flag?"--had been answered by the Supreme Court of the United States.
Although it was well known that the Constitution did not contemplate the
government of dependencies, such as the Philippines and Porto Rico, the
Court, by generous and ingenious interpretations, found a way for
=Porto Rico.=--The government of Porto Rico was a relatively simple
matter. It was a single island with a fairly homogeneous population
apart from the Spanish upper class. For a time after military occupation
Congress in 1900. The law assured to the Porto Ricans American
protection but withheld American citizenship--a boon finally granted in
1917. It provided for a governor and six executive secretaries appointed
by the President with the approval of the Senate; and for a legislature
of two houses--one elected by popular native vote, and an upper chamber
composed of the executive secretaries and five other persons appointed
in the same manner. Thus the United States turned back to the provincial
system maintained by England in Virginia or New York in old colonial
days. The natives were given a voice in their government and the power
President Roosevelt. It lasted until the new organic act of 1917.
[Illustration: _Photograph from Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
A SUGAR MILL, PORTO RICO]
=The Philippines.=--The administration of the Philippines presented far
languages and races, the differences in civilization all combined to
challenge the skill of the government. Moreover, there was raging in
faced. Following the lines laid down by President McKinley, the
evolution of American policy fell into three stages. At first the
military power. In 1901 a civilian commission, headed by William Howard
the provinces in which order had been restored. Six years later, under
the terms of an organic act, passed by Congress in 1902, the third stage
was reached. The local government passed into the hands of a governor
Rico, remained intact until a Democratic Congress under President
phase by making both houses elective. Thus, by the steady pursuit of a
liberal policy, self-government was extended to the dependencies; but it
encouraged rather than extinguished the vigorous movement among the
Philippine natives for independence.
[Illustration: _Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
MR TAFT IN THE PHILIPPINES]
=Cuban Relations.=--Within the sphere of colonial affairs, Cuba, though
Washington. In the fine enthusiasm that accompanied the declaration of
war on Spain, Congress, unmindful of practical considerations,
recognized the independence of Cuba and disclaimed "any disposition or
intention to exercise sovereignty, jurisdiction, or control over said
island except for the pacification thereof." In the settlement that
guiding hand. Before withdrawing American troops from the island,
series of restrictions known as the Platt amendment, limiting her power
to the United States coaling stations at certain points to be agreed
accepted their fate. Even when in 1906 President Roosevelt landed
American troops in the island to quell a domestic dissension, they
acquiesced in the action, evidently regarding it as a distinct warning
that they should learn to manage their elections in an orderly manner.
THE ROOSEVELT DOMESTIC POLICIES
trusts, capital, labor, poverty, riches, lawbreaking, good citizenship,
careful examination. That he did this with any fixed design or policy in
mind does not seem to be the case. He admitted himself that when he
became President he did not have in hand any settled or far-reaching
plan of social betterment. He did have, however, serious convictions on
"the most efficient possible instrument in helping the people of the
United States to better themselves in every way, politically, socially,
and industrially. I believed with all my heart in real and
thorough-going democracy and I wished to make the democracy industrial
as well as political, although I had only partially formulated the
but a great policeman keeping order among the people in a struggle over
Roosevelt's attitude toward the Constitution and the office of
President. He utterly repudiated the narrow construction of our national
charter. He held that the Constitution "should be treated as the
strait-jacket cunningly fashioned to strangle growth." He viewed the
Jeffersonian school, of whom there were many on occasion even in the
Republican party, had taken a view that the President could do nothing
Roosevelt took exactly the opposite position. It was his opinion that it
Constitution or the laws." He went on to say that he acted "for the
common well-being of all our people whenever and in whatever manner was
partnerships and individual owners. The growth of these gigantic
aggregations of capital had been the leading feature in American
had seen a grievous danger to the republic. "Plutocracy has taken the
the tariff and the trusts"--such was the battle cry which had been taken
up by Bryan and his followers.
trusts were the product of the tariff or of governmental action of any
forces": (1) destructive competition among business men compelling them
to avoid ruin by cooperation in fixing prices; (2) the growth of markets
on a national scale and even international scale calling for vast
accumulations of capital to carry on such business; (3) the possibility
of immense savings by the union of many plants under one management. In
the corporation he saw a new stage in the development of American
industry. Unregulated competition he regarded as "the source of evils
to survive." The notion, therefore, that these immense business concerns
should be or could be broken up by a decree of law, Roosevelt considered
absurd.
At the same time he proposed that "evil trusts" should be prevented from
"wrong-doing of any kind"; that is, punished for plain swindling, for
dealt with rival firms, and for conspiracies with railways to ruin
regulation by the government. This, he contended, would preserve the
that accompanied it. The railway company he declared to be a public
servant. "Its rates should be just to and open to all shippers alike."
were private concerns to be managed solely by their owners without let
could be abolished by tariff reduction or criminal prosecution.
=The Labor Question.=--On the labor question, then pressing to the front
time. He declared that the working-man, single-handed and empty-handed,
threatened with starvation if unemployed, was no match for the employer
who was able to bargain and wait. This led him, accordingly, to accept
the principle of the trade union; namely, that only by collective
bargaining can labor be put on a footing to measure its strength equally
with capital. While he severely arraigned labor leaders who advocated
violence and destructive doctrines, he held that "the organization of
labor into trade unions and federations is necessary, is beneficent, and
eliminate undeserved poverty, industrial diseases, unemployment, and the
of 1901, for instance, he urged that workers injured in industry should
and industrial justice."
=Great Riches and Taxation.=--Even the challenge of the radicals, such
as the Populists, who alleged that "the toil of millions is boldly
poor were growing poorer. He asserted that, on the contrary, the average
ever before in the history of our country. That there had been abuses in
that even immense fortunes, on the whole, represented positive benefits
conferred upon the country. Nevertheless he felt that grave dangers to
astonishment of many leaders in his own party, he boldly announced in a
message to Congress that he approved both income and inheritance taxes,
then generally viewed as Populist or Democratic measures. He even took
the stand that such taxes should be laid in order to bring about a more
equitable distribution of wealth and greater equality of opportunity
=Economic Legislation.=--When President Roosevelt turned from the field
were too advanced for the members of his party in Congress, and where
Nevertheless, in his administrations several measures were enacted that
it extended the commission's power over oil pipe lines, express
companies, and other interstate carriers; it gave the commission the
certain shippers; and it prohibited common carriers from transporting
goods owned by themselves, especially coal, except for their own proper
deleterious foods and drugs. A significant piece of labor legislation
was an act of the same Congress making interstate railways liable to
damages for injuries sustained by their employees. When this measure was
declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court it was reenacted with the
was offered in the law of 1908 limiting the hours of railway employees
engaged as trainmen or telegraph operators.
forests, waterways, and the public lands--interested President Roosevelt
message to Congress he placed the conservation of natural resources
among "the most vital internal problems" of the age, and forcibly
emphasized an issue that had been discussed in a casual way since
Cleveland's first administration. The suggestion evoked an immediate
response in Congress. Under the leadership of Senator Newlands, of
redemption of the desert areas of the West. The proceeds from the sale
of public lands were dedicated to the construction of storage dams and
Furthermore it was stipulated that the rents paid by water users should
go into a reclamation fund to continue the good work forever.
Construction was started immediately under the terms of the law. Within
million were actually irrigated. In the single year 1918, the crops of
Forestry--a recommendation carried out in 1907 when the Forestry Service
improved and knowledge of the subject spread among the people. Lands in
the national forest available for agriculture were opened to settlers.
Water power sites on the public domain were leased for a term of years
to private companies instead of being sold outright. The area of the
by presidential proclamation--more than 43 million acres being added in
one year, 1907. The men who turned sheep and cattle to graze on the
public lands were compelled to pay a fair rental, much to their
dissatisfaction. Fire prevention work was undertaken in the forests on a
large scale, reducing the appalling, annual destruction of timber.
carelessly selling to mining companies at low figures, were withdrawn
disposition of them in the public interest. Prosecutions were
instituted against men who had obtained public lands by fraud and vast
tracts were recovered for the national domain. An agitation was begun
which bore fruit under the administrations of Taft and Wilson in laws
reserving to the federal government the ownership of coal, water power,
to develop them under leases for a period of years.
was also a distinct "personality." His discrimination between "good" and
"bad" trusts led him to prosecute some of them with vigor. On his
initiative, the Northern Securities Company, formed to obtain control of
certain great western railways, was dissolved by order of the Supreme
Court. Proceedings were instituted against the American Tobacco Company
and the Standard Oil Company as monopolies in violation of the Sherman
brought to book. In fact hardly a week passed without stirring news of
"wrong doers" and "malefactors" haled into federal courts.
=The Great Coal Strike.=--The Roosevelt theory that the President could
do anything for public welfare not forbidden by the Constitution and the
laws was put to a severe test in 1902. A strike of the anthracite coal
Industries were paralyzed for the want of coal; cities were threatened
with the appalling menace of a winter without heat. Governors and mayors
demands of the men and refused to permit the arbitration of the points
in dispute, although John Mitchell, the leader of the miners, repeatedly
urged it. After observing closely the course affairs, President
arranged to have the federal troops, if necessary, take possession of
induced them to accept, as a substitute or compromise, arbitration by a
commission which he appointed. Thus, by stepping outside the
such vigor aroused deep hostility within as well as without his party.
1904 and it was said that the "financial and corporation interests" were
accused him of having "stolen Mr. Bryan's thunder," by harrying the
trusts and favoring labor unions. When the Republican convention
was nominated by acclamation.
denounced the President as erratic, dangerous, and radical and decided
to assume the moderate role themselves. They put aside Mr. Bryan and
selected as their candidate, Judge Alton B. Parker, of New York, a man
who repudiated free silver and made a direct appeal for the conservative
fell more than a million below that cast for Bryan in 1900; of the 476
the Republican sections, even invaded Democratic territory, carrying the
state of Missouri. Thus vindicated at the polls, he became more
outspoken than ever. His leadership in the party was so widely
recognized that he virtually selected his own successor.
=The Campaign of 1908.=--Long before the end of his elective term,
William Howard Taft, of Ohio, his Secretary of War. To attain this end
convention assembled, Mr. Taft easily won the nomination. Though the
party platform was conservative in tone, he gave it a progressive tinge
States Senators, an income tax, and other liberal measures. President
Roosevelt announced his faith in the Republican candidate and appealed
to the country for his election.
were propitious for a third attempt to win the presidency. The disaster
conservative policy. With little difficulty, therefore, the veteran
standard, won the nomination, and wrote a platform vigorously attacking
the tariff, trusts, and monopolies. Supported by a loyal following, he
entered the lists, only to meet another defeat. Though he polled almost
a million and a half more votes than did Judge Parker in 1904, the palm
went to Mr. Taft.
his term, President Taft had to face the tariff issue. He had met it in
the Dingley bill and the position of many industries had been altered
thankless task--had arrived. Taft accepted the inevitable and called
Congress in a special session. Until the midsummer of 1909, Republican
Senators and Representatives wrangled over tariff schedules, the
President making little effort to influence their decisions. When on
angrily against many of the high rates imposed by the bill. They had
=The Income Tax Amendment.=--The rift in party harmony was widened by
declaring it unconstitutional. Conservative men were alarmed by the
evident willingness of some members to flout a solemn decree of that
eminent tribunal. At the same time they saw a powerful combination of
Republicans and Democrats determined upon shifting some of the burden of
was reached. The income tax bill was dropped for the present; but
taxes upon incomes from whatever source they might be derived, without
population. The states ratified the amendment and early in 1913 it was
proclaimed.
Taft continued to push forward with his legislative program. He
jurisdiction, among other things, over appeals from the interstate
followed by an act establishing a system of postal savings banks in
connection with the post office--a scheme which had long been opposed by
private banks. Two years later, Congress defied the lobby of the express
companies and supplemented the savings banks with a parcels post system,
progressive nations. With a view to improving the business
administration of the federal government, the President obtained from
Congress a large appropriation for an economy and efficiency commission
and recommending improved devices and practices. The chief result of
this investigation was a vigorous report in favor of a national budget
system, which soon found public backing.
President Taft negotiated with England and France general treaties
providing for the arbitration of disputes which were "justiciable" in
amended that Taft abandoned them altogether. A tariff reciprocity
naught by the overthrow of the Liberals in the Canadian elections of
appeared to be the successful prosecution of several great combinations.
In two important cases, the Supreme Court ordered the dissolution of the
they violated the Sherman Anti-Trust law. In taking this step Chief
construed to mean that the Court would not interfere with corporations
as such, became the subject of a popular outcry against the President
and the judges.
PROGRESSIVE INSURGENCY AND THE ELECTION OF 1912
=Growing Dissensions.=--All in all, Taft's administration from the first
day had been disturbed by party discord. High words had passed over the
tariff bill and disgruntled members of Congress could not forget them.
age. In the House of Representatives there developed a group of young
Joseph G. Cannon, and other members of the "old guard," as they named
the men of long service and conservative minds. In 1910, the insurgents
went so far as to join with the Democrats in a movement to break the
Speaker's sway by ousting him from the rules committee and depriving him
of the power to appoint its members. The storm was brewing. In the
autumn of that year the Democrats won a clear majority in the House of
Representatives and began an open battle with President Taft by
demanding an immediate downward revision of the tariff.
of 1912, the dissenters within the Republican party added the prefix
"Progressive" to their old title and began to organize a movement to
prevent the renomination of Mr. Taft. As early as January 21, 1911, they
Follette of Wisconsin and launched an attack on the Taft measures and
policies. In October they indorsed Mr. La Follette as "the logical
Republican candidate" and appealed to the party for support. The
controversy over the tariff had grown into a formidable revolt against
=Roosevelt in the Field.=--After looking on for a while, ex-President
Roosevelt took a hand in the fray. Soon after his return in 1910 from a
hunting trip in Africa and a tour in Europe, he made a series of
Kansas, he favored regulation of the trusts, a graduated income tax
conservation of natural resources, labor legislation, the direct
primary, and the recall of elective officials. In an address before the
Ohio state constitutional convention in February, 1912, he indorsed the
initiative and referendum and announced a doctrine known as the "recall
of judicial decisions." This was a new and radical note in American
who set aside any act of a state legislature passed in the interests of
social welfare. The Progressive Republicans, impressed by these
addresses, turned from La Follette to Roosevelt and on February 24,
=The Split in the Republican Party.=--The country then witnessed the
strange spectacle of two men who had once been close companions engaged
in a bitter rivalry to secure a majority of the delegates to the
usual hearings, settled the disputes in such a way that Taft received a
safe majority. After a week of negotiation, Roosevelt and his followers
convention and the few who remained behind refused to answer the roll
call. Undisturbed by this formidable bolt, the regular Republicans went
=The Formation of the Progressive Party.=--The action of the Republicans
in seating the Taft delegates was vigorously denounced by Roosevelt. He
declared that the convention had no claim to represent the voters of the
Republican party; that any candidate named by it would be "the
beneficiary of a successful fraud"; and that it would be deeply
discreditable to any man to accept the convention's approval under such
call went forth for a "Progressive" convention to be held in Chicago on
August 5. The assembly which duly met on that day was a unique political
conference. Prominence was given to women delegates, and "politicians"
were notably absent. Roosevelt himself, who was cheered as a conquering
hero, made an impassioned speech setting forth his "confession of
primaries, the initiative, referendum, and recall, popular election of
United States Senators, and the short ballot. It favored a program of
wages for women. It approved the regulation, rather than the
dissolution, of the trusts. Like apostles in a new and lofty cause, the
Progressives entered a vigorous campaign for the election of their
=Woodrow Wilson and the Election of 1912.=--With the Republicans
divided, victory loomed up before the Democrats. Naturally, a terrific
Champ Clark, Speaker of the House of Representatives, and Governor
delegates, powerfully influenced by Mr. Bryan, finally decided in favor
of the governor. As a professor, a writer on historical and political
subjects, and the president of Princeton University, Mr. Wilson had
become widely known in public life. As the governor of New Jersey he had
determination he had "waged war on the bosses," and pushed through the
utilities, and creating a system of workmen's compensation in
industries. During the presidential campaign that followed Governor
addresses later published under the title of _The New Freedom_. He
the big masters of commerce, the heads of railroad corporations and of
steamship corporations."
In the election Governor Wilson easily secured a majority of the
electoral votes, and his party, while retaining possession of the House
of Representatives, captured the Senate as well. The popular verdict,
Progressive and Republican vote exceeded that of the Democrats by
polled about 900,000 votes, more than double the number received four
Republicans, after holding the office of President for sixteen years,
passed out of power, and the government of the country was intrusted to
outstanding figures of the modern age, Woodrow Wilson.
J.B. Bishop, _Theodore Roosevelt and His Time_ (2 vols.).
Theodore Roosevelt, _Autobiography_; _New Nationalism_; _Progressive
Principles_.
Walter Weyl, _The New Democracy_.
H. Croly, _The Promise of American Life_.
J.B. Bishop, _The Panama Gateway_.
J.B. Scott, _The Hague Peace Conferences_.
W.B. Munro (ed.), _Initiative, Referendum, and Recall_.
Gifford Pinchot, _The Fight for Conservation_.
W.F. Willoughby, _Territories and Dependencies of the United States_
=Research Topics=
Series), pp. 40-75; Paxson, _The New Nation_ (Riverside Series), pp.
293-307.
=Our Insular Possessions.=--Elson, _History of the United States_, pp.
896-904.
=Latin-American Relations.=--Haworth, pp. 294-299; Ogg, pp. 254-257.
286-292; Elson, pp. 906-911.
=Conservation.=--Haworth, pp. 331-334; Ogg, pp. 96-115; Beard, _American
351-360; Ogg, pp. 167-186; Paxson, pp. 324-342; Elson, pp. 916-924.
=The Campaign of 1912.=--Haworth, pp. 360-379; Ogg, pp. 187-208.
=Questions=
2. Name the chief foreign and domestic questions of the Roosevelt-Taft
problem?
5. What is the strategic importance of the Caribbean to the United
touched.
7. What is meant by the question: "Does the Constitution follow the
flag?"
8. Trace the history of self-government in Porto Rico. In the
10. What was Roosevelt's theory of our Constitution?
12. Outline the domestic phases of Roosevelt's administrations.
13. Account for the dissensions under Taft.
15. What was Roosevelt's progressive program?
16. Review Wilson's early career and explain the underlying theory of
CHAPTER XXII
THE SPIRIT OF REFORM IN AMERICA
AN AGE OF CRITICISM
Progressive uprising was not a sudden and unexpected one. It had been
long in preparation. The revolt against corruption in politics which
produced the Liberal Republican outbreak in the seventies and the
Mugwump movement of the eighties was followed by continuous criticism of
American political and economic development. From 1880 until his death
Association, kept up a running fire upon the abuses of the spoils
his great work, _The American Commonwealth_, published in 1888, by
picturing fearlessly the political rings and machines which dominated
the cities, gave the whole country a fresh shock. Six years later Henry
D. Lloyd, in a powerful book entitled _Wealth against Commonwealth_,
attacked in scathing language certain trusts which had destroyed their
of established reputation in the historical field, gave to the public an
account of the Standard Oil Company, revealing the ruthless methods of
municipalities in a series of articles bearing the painful heading: _The
Shame of the Cities_. The critical spirit appeared in almost every form;
in weekly and monthly magazines, in essays and pamphlets, in editorials
_The Jungle_. It became so savage and so wanton that the opening years
into the hands of professional politicians who devoted their time to
managing conventions, making platforms, nominating candidates, and
dictating to officials; in return for their "services" they sold offices
and privileges. It was alleged that mayors and councils had bargained
away for private benefit street railway and other franchises. It was
poverty, slums, and misery of great cities. Others took up "frenzied
an innocent public. Still others professed to see in the accumulations
=The Attack on "Invisible Government."=--Some even maintained that the
control of public affairs had passed from the people to a sinister
minority called "the invisible government." So eminent and conservative
such an imputation. Speaking of his native state, New York, he said:
"What is the government of this state? What has it been during the forty
Conkling and Arthur and Cornell and Platt, from the days of David B.
Hill down to the present time, the government of the state has presented
two different lines of activity: one, of the constitutional and
statutory officers of the state and the other of the party leaders; they
call them party bosses. They call the system--I don't coin the
how many years Mr. Conkling was the supreme ruler in this state. The
governor did not count, the legislature did not count, comptrollers and
ruled it. It was not the governor; it was not the legislature; it was
Mr. Platt. And the capital was not here [in Albany]; it was at 49
Broadway; Mr. Platt and his lieutenants. It makes no difference what
Arthur or Platt or by the names of men now living. The ruler of the
state during the greater part of the forty years of my acquaintance with
or by law.... The party leader is elected by no one, accountable to no
one, bound by no oath of office, removable by no one."
of reform. The charges were usually exaggerated; often wholly false; but
there was enough truth in them to warrant renewed vigilance on the part
of American democracy. President Roosevelt doubtless summed up the
sentiment of the great majority of citizens when he demanded the
punishment of wrong-doers in 1907, saying: "It makes not a particle of
difference whether these crimes are committed by a capitalist or by a
laborer, by a leading banker or manufacturer or railroad man or by a
leading representative of a labor union. Swindling in stocks, corrupting
wrecking railroads, by destroying competitors through rebates--these
forms of wrong-doing in the capitalist are far more infamous than any
to stop "muckraking" and proceed to the constructive work of removing
the abuses that had grown up.
POLITICAL REFORMS
=The Public Service.=--It was a wise comprehension of the needs of
American democracy that led the friends of reform to launch and to
sustain for more than half a century a movement to improve the public
service. On the one side they struck at the spoils system; at the right
establishing five vital principles in law: (1) admission to office, not
examinations; (2) promotion for meritorious service of the government
funds; (4) permanent tenure during good behavior; and (5) no dismissals
executive force of approximately 414,000. While gaining steadily at
Washington, civil service reformers carried their agitation into the
states and cities. By 1920 they were able to report ten states with
civil service commissions and the merit system well intrenched in more
than three hundred municipalities.
In excluding spoilsmen from public office, the reformers were, in a
But there was a second and larger phase to their movement, one
servants into the places of responsibility. Everywhere on land and sea,
in town and country, new burdens were laid upon public officers. They
were called upon to supervise the ships sailing to and from our ports;
to inspect the water and milk supplies of our cities; to construct and
regulate the complicated rates of railway companies; to safeguard health
fires; and to descend into the deeps of the earth to combat the deadly
coal gases that assail the miners. In a word, those who labored to
master the secrets and the powers of nature were summoned to the aid of
the government: chemists, engineers, architects, nurses, surgeons,
foresters--the skilled in all the sciences, arts, and crafts.
Keeping rascals out was no task at all compared with the problem of
reformers, "we must make attractive careers in the government work for
to it that those entering at the bottom have a chance to rise to the
=The Australian Ballot.=--A second line of attack on the political
machines was made in connection with the ballot. In the early days
elections were frequently held in the open air and the poll was taken by
a show of hands or by the enrollment of the voters under names of their
of the printed ballot, there was still no secrecy about elections. Each
party prepared its own ballot, often of a distinctive color, containing
the names of its candidates. On election day, these papers were handed
the ballot dropped into the box, or from some mark on the outside of the
folded ballot, just how each man voted. Those who bought votes were sure
ballot strengthened the party machine.
As a remedy for such abuses, reformers, learning from the experience of
though it appeared in many forms, had certain constant features. It was
contained the names of all candidates of all parties; it was given out
only in the polling places; and it was marked in secret. The first state
to introduce it was Massachusetts. The year was 1888. Before the end of
the century it had been adopted by nearly all the states in the union.
The salutary effect of the reform in reducing the amount of cheating
=The Direct Primary.=--In connection with the uprising against machine
politics, came a call for the abolition of the old method of nominating
candidates by conventions. These time-honored party assemblies, which
conclaves of party workers, sustained by the spoils system, and
dominated by an inner circle of bosses. The remedy offered in this case
was again "more democracy," namely, the abolition of the party
longer to be chosen by secret conferences. Any member of a party was to
be allowed to run for any office, to present his name to his party by
fellow partisans at a direct primary--an election within the party. In
this movement Governor La Follette of Wisconsin took the lead and his
state was the first in the union to adopt the direct primary for
state-wide purposes. The idea spread, rapidly in the West, more slowly
in the East. The public, already angered against "the bosses," grasped
eagerly at it. Governor Hughes in New York pressed it upon the unwilling
Delaware, Connecticut, and New Mexico were the only states that had not
very time the pendulum was beginning to swing backward.
primaries was still advancing everywhere, a demand for the popular
election of Senators, usually associated with it, swept forward to
practice this rule transferred the selection of Senators to secret
caucuses of party members in the state legislatures. In connection with
brazen bribery and corruption, and dark hints besides. The Senate was
called by its detractors "a millionaires' club" and it was looked upon
likewise "more democracy"--direct election of Senators by popular vote.
This reform was not a new idea. It had been proposed in Congress as
early as 1826. President Johnson, an ardent advocate, made it the
the House of Representatives by the requisite two-thirds vote
incorporated it in an amendment to the federal Constitution. Again and
Senators leveled their batteries against it. Mr. Hoar of Massachusetts
declared that it would transfer the seat of power to the "great cities
the Senate and in the end the whole scheme of the national Constitution
as designed and established by the framers of the Constitution and the
people who adopted it."
Failing in the Senate, advocates of popular election made a rear assault
through the states. They induced state legislatures to enact laws
requiring the nomination of candidates for the Senate by the direct
selected by that method began to pour in upon the floors of Congress;
proclaimed in effect.
=The Initiative and Referendum.=--As a corrective for the evils which
had grown up in state legislatures there arose a demand for the
The initiative permits any one to draw up a proposed bill; and, on
initiated receives a sufficient majority, it becomes a law. The
referendum allows citizens who disapprove any act passed by the
legislature to get up a petition against it and thus bring about a
reference of the measure to the voters at the polls for approval or
rejection. These two practices constitute a form of "direct government."
These devices were prescribed "to restore the government to the people."
The Populists favored them in their platform of 1896. Mr. Bryan, two
years later, made them a part of his program, and in the same year South
Dakota adopted them. In 1902 Oregon, after a strenuous campaign, added a
direct legislation amendment to the state constitution. Within ten years
Wyoming, had followed this example. To the east of the Mississippi,
however, direct legislation met a chilly reception. By 1920 only five
states in this section had accepted it: Maine, Massachusetts, Ohio,
Michigan, and Maryland, the last approving the referendum only.
=The Recall.=--Executive officers and judges, as well as legislatures,
should likewise be subjected to a closer scrutiny by the public. For
this purpose there was advanced a scheme known as the recall--which
This feature of direct government, tried out first in the city of Los
initiative and referendum. At the end of ten years' agitation, only ten
states, mainly in the West, had adopted it for general purposes, and
As a general proposition, direct government in all its forms was
bitterly opposed by men of a conservative cast of mind. It was denounced
by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge as "nothing less than a complete revolution
the representative principle and "undermine and overthrow the bulwarks
of ordered liberty and individual freedom." Mr. Taft shared Mr. Lodge's
views and spoke of direct government with scorn. "Votes," he exclaimed,
"are not bread ... referendums do not pay rent or furnish houses,
relieve inequalities of condition or of opportunity."
evils, the management of cities early came under critical scrutiny. City
government, Mr. Bryce had remarked, was the one conspicuous failure in
warning by others. Many prescriptions were offered by doctors of the
body politic. Chief among them was the idea of simplifying the city
government so that the light of public scrutiny could shine through it.
city government!" was the new cry in municipal reform. So, many city
councils were reduced in size; one of the two houses, which several
cities had adopted in imitation of the federal government, was
given the power to appoint all the chief officials. This made the mayor,
in some cases, the only elective city official and gave the voters a
"short ballot" containing only a few names--an idea which some proposed
A further step in the concentration of authority was taken in Galveston,
the devastating storm of 1901, and confronted by the difficult problems
of reconstruction, felt the necessity for a more businesslike management
five commissioners, one of whom, without any special prerogatives, was
form of government, as it was soon characterized, was adopted by Des
Moines, Iowa. The attention of all municipal reformers was drawn to it
and it was hailed as the guarantee of a better day. By 1920, more than
four hundred cities, including Memphis, Spokane, Birmingham, Newark, and
Chicago kept their boards of aldermen.
=The City Manager Plan.=--A few years' experience with commission
government revealed certain patent defects. The division of the work
irresponsibility. Commissioners were often lacking in the technical
ability required to manage such difficult matters as fire and police
protection, public health, public works, and public utilities. Some one
then proposed to carry over into city government an idea from the
business world. In that sphere the stockholders of each corporation
elect the directors and the directors, in turn, choose a business
manager to conduct the affairs of the company. It was suggested that the
city commissioners, instead of attempting to supervise the details of
commission plan, it became popular. Within eight years more than one
municipalities were Dayton, Springfield (Ohio), Akron, Kalamazoo, and
Phoenix. It promised to create a new public service profession, that of
MEASURES OF ECONOMIC REFORM
restriction of the spoils system, the enlargement of direct popular
control over the organs of government were not the sole answers made by
the reformers to the critics of American institutions. Nor were they the
the "general welfare." The concrete objects covered by that broad term
were many and varied; but they included the prevention of extortion by
railway and other corporations, the protection of public health, the
a few clung to the ancient doctrine that the government should not
rejected that theory as vigorously as they rejected the doctrines of an
extreme socialism which exalts the state above the individual. Leaders
representing every shade of opinion proclaimed the government an
abandon definitely," said Roosevelt, "the _laissez-faire_ theory of
governmental control, paying no attention to the cries of worthy people
observed: "Undoubtedly the government can wisely do much more ... to
relieve the oppressed, to create greater equality of opportunity, to
make reasonable terms for labor in employment, and to furnish vocational
which the government cannot go with any good practical results in
seeking to make men and society better."
in a large way to control private enterprise in the public interest were
made by the Northwestern states in the decade between 1870 and 1880.
Granges, that the railways extorted the highest possible rates for
freight and passengers, that favoritism was shown to large shippers,
"quasi-public" concerns, like the roads and ferries, and thus subject to
government control. Accordingly laws were enacted bringing the railroads
under state supervision. In some cases the state legislature fixed the
maximum rates to be charged by common carriers, and in other cases
investigation. This legislation was at first denounced in the East as
nothing less than the "confiscation" of the railways in the interest of
the farmers. Attempts to have the Supreme Court of the United States
declare it unconstitutional were made without avail; still a principle
was finally laid down to the effect that in fixing rates state
"fair" return on the capital invested.
In a few years the Granger spirit appeared in Congress. An investigation
revealed a long list of abuses committed by the railways against
discriminations in rates, and prohibited other objectionable practices
on the part of railways. This measure was loosely enforced and the
abuses against which it was directed continued almost unabated. A demand
heed. In 1903 it enacted the Elkins law, forbidding railways to charge
and agents of companies, who granted secret favors to shippers, and upon
Commission was authorized, upon complaint of some party aggrieved, and
had been charged by the companies. In effect, the right to fix freight
and passenger rates was taken out of the hands of the owners of the
Interstate Commerce Commission. Thus private property to the value of
and subject to government regulation in the common interest.
=Municipal Utilities.=--Similar problems arose in connection with the
999 years. The rates charged and services rendered were left largely to
the will of the companies holding the franchises. Mergers or unions of
companies were common and the public was deluged with stocks and bonds
of doubtful value; bankruptcies were frequent. The connection between
the utility companies and the politicians was, to say the least, not
always in the public interest.
American ingenuity was quick to devise methods for eliminating such
evils. Three lines of progress were laid out by the reformers. One group
proposed that such utilities should be subject to municipal or state
regulation, that the formation of utility companies should be under
by public authority. In some cases state, and in other cases municipal,
commissions were created to exercise this great power over "quasi-public
supervision of a single railway commission. Other states followed this
example rapidly. By 1920 the principle of public control over municipal
A second line of reform appeared in the "model franchise" for utility
Chicago street railway settlement of 1906. The total capital of the
company was fixed at a definite sum, its earnings were agreed upon, and
to do so. In many states, about the same time, it was provided that no
franchises to utility companies could run more than twenty-five years.
A third group of reformers were satisfied with nothing short of
municipal ownership. They proposed to drive private companies entirely
out of the field and vest the ownership and management of municipal
cities was the overcrowding in houses unfit for habitation. An inquiry
in New York City made under the authority of the state in 1902 revealed
poverty, misery, slums, dirt, and disease almost beyond imagination. The
immediate answer was the enactment of a tenement house law prescribing
in great detail the size of the rooms, the air space, the light and the
sanitary arrangement for all new buildings. An immense improvement
followed and the idea was quickly taken up in other states having large
rights of landlords by assuring to the public "reasonable rents" for
=Workmen's Compensation.=--No small part of the poverty in cities was
due to the injury of wage-earners while at their trade. Every year the
Under the old law, the workman or his family had to bear the loss unless
the employer had been guilty of some extraordinary negligence. Even in
"damages." In short, although employers insured their buildings and
injustice of this, though apparent enough now, was once not generally
injuries for which he was not personally responsible; but the argument
[Illustration: AN EAST SIDE STREET IN NEW YORK]
place, laws were enacted requiring employers to pay damages in certain
amounts according to the nature of the case, no matter how the accident
occurred, as long as the injured person was not guilty of willful
form of automatic grants made by state commissions to persons injured in
=Minimum Wages and Mothers' Pensions.=--Another source of poverty,
for their labor. Report after report showed this. In 1912 Massachusetts
which might be paid to women and children. Oregon, the following year,
created a commission with power to prescribe minimum wages in certain
industries, based on the cost of living, and to enforce the rates fixed.
keep their homes intact and bring up their children, a device known as
mothers' pensions became popular during the second decade of the
Illinois, had laws authorizing the payment from public funds of definite
sums to widows with children. Within four years, thirty-five states had
similar legislation.
=Taxation and Great Fortunes.=--As a part of the campaign waged against
growing to manhood.... Our aim is to recognize what Lincoln pointed out:
equal; but also to insist that there should be equality of self-respect
and of mutual respect, an equality of rights before the law, and at
obtains the chance to show the stuff that is in him when compared with
The spirit of the new age was, therefore, one of reform, not of
revolution. It called for no evolutionary or utopian experiments, but
for the steady and progressive enactment of measures aimed at admitted
abuses and designed to accomplish tangible results in the name of public
=General References=
P.L. Haworth, _America in Ferment_.
E.R.A. Seligman, _The Income Tax_.
W.Z. Ripley, _Railroads: Rates and Regulation_.
E.S. Bradford, _Commission Government in American Cities_.
H.R. Seager, _A Program of Social Reform_.
C. Zueblin, _American Municipal Progress_.
W.E. Walling, _Progressivism and After_.
_The American Year Book_ (an annual publication which contains reviews
of reform legislation).
=Research Topics=
="The Muckrakers."=--Paxson, _The New Nation_ (Riverside Series), pp.
309-323.
=Civil Service Reform.=--Beard, _American Government and Politics_ (3d
ed.), pp. 222-230; Ogg, _National Progress_ (American Nation Series),
pp. 135-142.
pp. 160-166.
=Ballot Reform.=--Beard, _American Government_, pp. 672-705.
=Social and Economic Legislation.=--Beard, _American Government_, pp.
721-752.
=Questions=
1. Who were some of the critics of abuses in American life?
4. Discuss the use of criticism as an aid to progress in a democracy.
5. Explain what is meant by the "merit system" in the civil service.
new problems.
7. Describe the Australian ballot and the abuses against which it is
directed.
8. What are the elements of direct government? Sketch their progress in
the United States.
10. Explain the direct primary. Commission government. The city manager
it justified?
12. Enumerate five lines of recent economic reform.
THE NEW POLITICAL DEMOCRACY
=Women in Public Affairs.=--The social legislation enacted in response
industry and was promoted by their organizations. Where they did not
lead, they were affiliated with movements for social improvement. No
cause escaped their attention; no year passed without widening the range
of their interests. They served on committees that inquired into the
problems of the day; they appeared before legislative assemblies to
advocate remedies for the evils they discovered. By 1912 they were a
force to be reckoned with in national politics. In nine states complete
national suffrage amendment was in full swing. On every hand lay
affairs. This was the culmination of forces that had long been
operating.
interests could not fail to find a place in time in the written record
queens, knights and ladies, written partly to amuse and partly to
instruct the classes that appeared in its pages. With the growth of
commerce, parliaments, and international relations, politics and
transactions of everyday life were deemed worthy of a place in the pages
in the light of the new age. So it will be with the rise and growth of
explored and given its place in the general record.
in America to-day is the result of a slow evolution from an almost
with them the English common law. Under that law, a married woman's
personal property--jewels, money, furniture, and the like--became her
him. Custom, if not law, prescribed that women should not take part in
town meetings or enter into public discussions of religious questions.
Indeed it is a far cry from the banishment of Anne Hutchinson from
Massachusetts in 1637, for daring to dispute with the church fathers, to
the political conventions of 1920 in which women sat as delegates, made
nominating speeches, and served on committees. In the contrast between
since the landing of the Pilgrims. The account of this progress is a
narrative of individual effort on the part of women, of organizations
among them, of generous aid from sympathetic men in the long agitation
for the removal of civil and political disabilities. It is in part also
a narrative of irresistible economic change which drew women into
industry, created a leisure class, gave women wages and incomes, and
therewith economic independence.
THE RISE OF THE WOMAN MOVEMENT
=Protests of Colonial Women.=--The republican spirit which produced
debates in the public forum. Women shared that fireside sifting of
political principles and passed on the findings of that scrutiny in
word. How widespread was this potent, though not spectacular force, is
and satirical "skits" on English rule that have come down to us. In this
search into the reasons of government, some women began to take thought
their protests on record. Abigail, the ingenious and witty wife of John
sister of "Lighthorse" Harry Lee, protested to her brother against the
=The Stir among European Women.=--Ferment in America, in the case of
women as of men, was quickened by events in Europe. In 1792, Mary
Wollstonecraft published in England the _Vindication of the Rights of
Women_--a book that was destined to serve the cause of liberty among
specific grievances which stirred English women were men's invasion of
women's industries, such as spinning and weaving; the denial of equal
educational opportunities; and political disabilities. In France also
the great Revolution raised questionings about the status of women. The
rights of "citizenesses" as well as the rights of "citizens" were
examined by the boldest thinkers. This in turn reacted upon women in the
to be found in the writings of a few early intellectual leaders. During
the first decades of the nineteenth century, books, articles, and
pamphlets about women came in increasing numbers from the press. Lydia
Maria Child wrote a history of women; Margaret Fuller made a critical
had played in the American Revolution.
who had been from the beginning excluded from every college in the
country. In this long battle, Emma Willard and Mary Lyon led the way;
who in 1827 became the editor of a "Ladies' Magazine," published in
helped to bear fruit in the founding of Vassar College shortly after the
interested in all the controversies going on around them. The temperance
question made a special appeal to them and they organized to demand the
right to be heard on it. In 1846 the "Daughters of Temperance" formed a
secret society favoring prohibition. They dared to criticize the
drunkenness be made a ground for divorce.
life. The Grimke sisters of South Carolina emancipated their bondmen,
and one of these sisters, exiled from Charleston for her "Appeal to the
system. In 1837 the National Women's Anti-Slavery Convention met in New
York; seventy-one women delegates represented eight states. Three years
who promptly excluded them from the sessions on the ground that it was
not fitting for women to take part in such meetings.
enlarged their interest. Nothing human did they consider alien to them.
They inveighed against cruel criminal laws and unsanitary prisons. They
organized poor relief and led in private philanthropy. Dorothea Dix
in 1845 a separate asylum for the criminal insane. In the same year
Sarah G. Bagley organized the Lowell Female Reform Association for the
purpose of reducing the long hours of labor for women, safeguarding "the
constitutions of future generations." Mrs. Eliza Woodson Farnham, matron
suffering, women were preparing programs of relief.
=Freedom of Speech for Women.=--In the advancement of their causes, of
part in open meetings. Here they encountered difficulties. The
appearance of women on the platform was new and strange. Naturally it
was widely resented. Antoinette Brown, although she had credentials as a
of the "Atlantic Monthly," declined a poem from Julia Ward Howe on the
theory that no woman could write a poem; but he added on second thought
that he might consider an article in prose. Nathaniel Hawthorne,
against their intrusion into new fields was added that aroused by their
ideas and methods. As temperance reformers, they criticized in a caustic
slavery they were especially bitter. One of their conventions, held at
sit silent during services, were in no mood to treat such a revolt
leniently. Then came the last straw. Women decided that they would
preach--out of the pulpit first, and finally in it.
=Women in Industry.=--The period of this ferment was also the age of the
industrial revolution in America, the rise of the factory system, and
the growth of mill towns. The labor of women was transferred from the
immigration on native labor, the wages of women as compared with those
of men, and the right of married women to their own earnings. Labor
Chamber of Deputies to show what working women could achieve in a
world by their own labor, they began to talk of their "economic
=The World Shaken by Revolution.=--Such was the quickening of women's
France which spread to Germany, Poland, Austria, Hungary, and Italy.
Once more the people of the earth began to explore the principles of
democracy and expound human rights. Women, now better educated and more
who had been jailed for too much insistence on women's rights exchanged
greetings with American women who were raising the same issue here. By
editor of the New York _Tribune_, though he afterwards recanted, used
his powerful pen in their behalf. Anti-slavery leaders welcomed their
intellectual, which had been stirring among women, crystallized a few
Accustomed to take part in church meetings with men, the Quakers
convention. Indeed, a man presided over the conference, for that
position seemed too presumptuous even for such stout advocates of
woman's rights.
The deliberations of the Seneca Falls convention resulted in a
example, the preamble began: "When in the course of human events it
becomes necessary for one portion of the family of man to assume among
the people of the earth a position different from that which they have
suffering of women under this government and such is now the necessity
entitled." Then followed the list of grievances, the same number which
disabilities imposed upon them by the English common law imported into
and their legal existence as separate persons. All these grievances they
recited to "a candid world." The remedies for the evils which they
endured were then set forth in detail. They demanded "equal rights" in
the colleges, trades, and professions; equal suffrage; the right to
share in all political offices, honors, and emoluments; the right to
complete equality in marriage, including equal guardianship of the
children; and for married women the right to own property, to keep
wages, to make contracts, to transact business, and to testify in the
courts of justice. In short, they declared women to be persons as men
are persons and entitled to all the rights and privileges of human
1848--to an amused and contemptuous world, it must be admitted--but to a
world fated to heed and obey.
=The First Gains in Civil Liberty.=--The convention of 1848 did not make
political enfranchisement the leading issue. Rather did it emphasize the
at the time. Indeed, the New York legislature of that very year, as the
Act setting aside the general principles of the English common law as
applied to women and giving them many of the "rights of man." California
and Wisconsin followed in 1850; Massachusetts in 1854; and Kansas in
1859. Other states soon fell into line. Women's earnings and
cruelty and drunkenness.
By degrees other steps were taken. The Woman's Medical College of
Association was formed to initiate an agitation for enlarged
educational opportunities for women. Other colleges soon emulated the
example of Oberlin: the University of Utah in 1850; Hillsdale College in
Michigan in 1855; Baker University in Kansas in 1858; and the University
of Iowa in 1860. New trades and professions were opened to women and old
THE NATIONAL STRUGGLE FOR WOMAN SUFFRAGE
after another, the agitation for equal suffrage came to the front. If
any year is to be fixed as the date of its beginning, it may very well
be 1850, when the suffragists of Ohio urged the state constitutional
convention to confer the vote upon them. With apparent spontaneity there
were held in the same year state suffrage conferences in Indiana,
Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts; and connections were formed among the
leaders of these meetings. At the same time the first national suffrage
convention was held in Worcester, Massachusetts, on the call of
eighty-nine leading men and women representing six states. Accounts of
the convention were widely circulated in this country and abroad.
English women,--for instance, Harriet Martineau,--sent words of
article in the "Westminster Review," which deeply interested the
woman suffrage in the British Parliament and the author of a powerful
the women of England were enfranchised before the adoption of the
The national suffrage convention of 1850 was followed by an
Petitions to legislative bodies were drafted, signed, and presented.
There were addresses by favorite orators like Garrison, Phillips, and
Curtis, and lectures and poems by men like Emerson, Longfellow, and
member of Congress from Rhode Island. By this time the last barrier to
white manhood suffrage in the North had been swept away and the woman's
=The Suffrage Movement Checked by the Civil War.=--Advocates of woman
suffrage believed themselves on the high road to success when the Civil
War engaged the energies and labors of the nation. Northern women became
Loyalty Leagues. They banded together to buy only domestic goods when
full share of responsibility. Even when the New York legislature took
advantage of their unguarded moments and repealed the law giving the
their devotion was unstinted and their sacrifices equal to the
necessities of the hour.
=The Federal Suffrage Amendment.=--Their plans and activities, when the
of the slaves and their proposed enfranchisement made prominent the
limiting the scope of its application, so far as the suffrage was
concerned, to the male sex. In making manhood suffrage national,
This was the signal for the advocates of woman suffrage. In March, 1869,
their proposed amendment was introduced in Congress by George W. Julian
which forbade disfranchisement on account of race. Support for the
that their case was hopeful. In their platform of 1872, for example, the
welcomed them to spheres of wider usefulness, and declared that the
demand of any class of citizens for additional rights deserved
"respectful consideration."
SUSAN B. ANTHONY]
Experience soon demonstrated, however, that praise was not the ballot.
before them. They had revived in 1866 their regular national convention.
suffrage association and organized annual pilgrimages to Congress to
congressmen were converted to their cause and presented it ably to their
newspapers and looked upon as freakish by the masses.
=The State Campaigns.=--Discouraged by the outcome of the national
campaign, suffragists turned to the voters of the individual states and
slow. Wyoming, it is true, while still a territory, granted suffrage to
complete political equality. In Utah, the third suffrage state, the
cause suffered many vicissitudes. Women were enfranchised by the
territorial legislature; they were deprived of the ballot by Congress in
recovered their former rights. During the same year, 1896, Idaho
victory for more than a decade.
committee reported the suffrage resolution by a favorable majority on
nine unfavorable reports and only once did the subject reach the point
of a general debate. At no time could anything like the required
=The Changing Status of Women.=--While the suffrage movement was
multiplying. College after college--Vassar, Bryn Mawr, Smith, Wellesley,
to mention a few--was founded to give them the advantages of higher
West, opened their doors to women, and women were received into the
professions of law and medicine. By the rapid growth of public high
do not know; but from that year forward we have the records of the
census. Between 1870 and 1900 the proportion of women in the professions
rose from less than two per cent to more than ten per cent; in trade and
transportation from 24.8 per cent to 43.2 per cent; and in manufacturing
gainfully employed as compared with 30,000,000 men. When, during the war
equal work and gave official recognition to the value of their services
in industry, it was discovered how far women had traveled along the road
forecast by the leaders of 1848.
=The Club Movement among Women.=--All over the country women's societies
of Frances Willard they made temperance reform a vital issue. They took
and conferences local, state, and national issues were discussed until
suffrage. In the same year the National Education Association, speaking
to vote for President of the United States. The time had arrived for a
new movement. A number of younger suffragists sought to use the votes of
suffrage amendment. Pressure then came upon Congress from every
grounds of justice; and from the suffragists who besought the women of
the West to vote against candidates for President, who would not approve
presidential candidate, Mr. Charles E. Hughes, speaking for the
ex-President, Roosevelt, exerted a powerful influence to keep it an
1920]
state of New York adopted equal suffrage in 1917. Oklahoma, South
Dakota, and Michigan swung into line the following year; several other
states, by legislative action, gave women the right to vote for
went before Congress and urged the passage of the suffrage amendment to
the Constitution. In June, 1919, the requisite two-thirds vote was
secured; the resolution was carried and transmitted to the states for
ratification. On August 28, 1920, the thirty-sixth state, Tennessee,
closed and the epoch of responsible citizenship opened.
Edith Abbott, _Women in Industry_.
C.P. Gilman, _Woman and Economics_.
I.H. Harper, _Life and Work of Susan B. Anthony_.
E.R. Hecker, _Short History of Woman's Rights_.
S.B. Anthony and I.H. Harper, _History of Woman Suffrage_ (4 vols.).
J.W. Taylor, _Before Vassar Opened_.
=Research Topics=
=The Rise of the Woman Suffrage Movement.=--McMaster, _History of the
_History of Suffrage in the United States_, pp. 135-145.
=The Development of the Suffrage Movement.=--Porter, pp. 228-254; Ogg,
_National Progress_ (American Nation Series), pp. 151-156 and p. 382.
=Women's Labor in the Colonial Period.=--E. Abbott, _Women in Industry_,
=Women and the Factory System.=--Abbott, pp. 35-62.
=Early Occupations for Women.=--Abbott, pp. 63-85.
=Women's Wages.=--Abbott, pp. 262-316.
1. Why were women involved in the reform movements of the new century?
2. What is history? What determines the topics that appear in written
3. State the position of women under the old common law.
4. What part did women play in the intellectual movement that preceded
the American Revolution?
5. Explain the rise of the discussion of women's rights.
7. Why was there a struggle for educational opportunities?
8. How did reform movements draw women into public affairs and what were
the chief results?
Discuss the work of the Seneca Falls convention.
12. Trace the rise of the suffrage movement. Show the effect of the
Civil War.
13. Review the history of the federal suffrage amendment.
=The New Economic Age.=--The spirit of criticism and the measures of
land was steadily mounting. The free land, once the refuge of restless
workingmen of the East and the immigrants from Europe, was a thing of
saved money, gone West, and taken up a homestead. Now the free lands
come to own a mine. That outlet was now closed as regards the immense
majority.... The majority of men who earned wages in the coal industry,
if they wished to progress at all, were compelled to progress not by
ceasing to be wage-earners but by improving the conditions under which
all the wage-earners of the country lived and worked."
The disappearance of the free land, President Roosevelt went on to say,
also produced "a crass inequality in the bargaining relation of the
employer and the individual employee standing alone. The great
coal-mining and coal-carrying companies which employed their tens of
thousands could easily dispense with the services of any particular
if he did not get one.... Individually the miners were impotent when
could make fair terms only by uniting into trade unions to bargain
when he favored the modification of the common law "so as to put
employees of little power and means on a level with their employers in
John D. Rockefeller, Jr., on the side of the great captains of industry,
development of industry, the employer and capital investor were
strangers to each other.... Personal relations can be revived only
through adequate representation of the employees. Representation is a
come a progressive evolution from aristocratic single control, whether
by capital, labor, or the state, to democratic, cooperative control by
COOPERATION BETWEEN EMPLOYERS AND EMPLOYEES
=Company Unions.=--The changed economic life described by the three
business concerns. All over the country decided efforts were made to
the devices adopted was that of the "company union." In one of the
Western lumber mills, for example, all the employees were invited to
join a company organization; they held monthly meetings to discuss
matters of common concern; they elected a "shop committee" to confer
with the representatives of the company; and periodically the agents of
wages, hours, safety rules, sanitation, recreation and other problems.
company's agents. All these things failing, the dispute was transferred
to a grand meeting of all the employees with the employers'
representatives, in common council. A deadlock, if it ensued from such a
individual concern. Representatives of trade unions from outside,
and the employees.
=Profit-sharing.=--Another proposal for drawing capital and labor
sums were paid to employees who remained in a company's service for a
definite period of years. Again they were given a certain percentage of
last plan was carried so far by a large soap manufacturing company that
the employees, besides becoming stockholders, secured the right to elect
representatives to serve on the board of directors who managed the
entire business. So extensive had profit-sharing become by 1914 that the
deemed it worthy of a special study. Though opposed by regular trade
=Labor Managers and Welfare Work.=--Another effort of employers to meet
the problems of the new age appeared in the appointment of specialists,
existing between masters and workers and discover practical methods for
giving courses of instruction on the subject to young men and women. In
Rochester, New York. The discussion revealed a wide range of duties
assigned to managers, including questions of wages, hours, sanitation,
humane. Thus it was evident that hundreds of employers had abandoned the
that their obligations ended with the payment of any wages they saw fit
to fix. In short, they were seeking to develop a spirit of cooperation
production of commodities by promoting the efficiency and happiness of
THE RISE AND GROWTH OF ORGANIZED LABOR
workers representing all the leading trades and crafts, organized into
unions of their own, had been built up outside the control of employers.
This was the American Federation of Labor, a nation-wide union of
before. At the time of its establishment it had approximately 150,000
members. Its growth up to the end of the century was slow, for the total
enrollment in 1900 was only 300,000. At that point the increase became
marked. The membership reached 1,650,000 in 1904 and more than 3,000,000
in 1919. To be counted in the ranks of organized labor were several
strong unions, friendly to the Federation, though not affiliated with
it. Such, for example, were the Railway Brotherhoods with more than half
organized labor was put at about 4,000,000 members, meaning, if we
United States were in some positive way dependent upon the operations of
trade unions.
=Historical Background.=--This was the culmination of a long and
skilled workmen--printers, shoemakers, tailors, and carpenters--had, as
we have seen, formed local unions in the large cities. Between 1830 and
1860, several aggressive steps were taken in the American labor
movement. For one thing, the number of local unions increased by leaps
established in every large manufacturing city a central labor body
cordwainers, iron molders, and other craftsmen considered common
problems and learned to cooperate with one another in enforcing the
demands of each craft. A third step was the federation of the unions of
the same craftsmen in different cities. The printers of New York,
formed a national trade union of printers built upon the local unions of
that craft. By the eve of the Civil War there were four or five powerful
national unions of this character. The expansion of the railway made
for workmen of small means. About 1834 an attempt was made to federate
the unions of all the different crafts into a national organization; but
_The National Labor Union._--The plan which failed in 1834 was tried
again in the sixties. During the war, industries and railways had
flourished as never before; prices had risen rapidly; the demand for
new local unions had been founded and eight or ten national trade unions
consolidation of all labor's forces; and in 1866, the year after the
surrender of General Lee at Appomattox, the "National Labor Union" was
formed at Baltimore under the leadership of an experienced organizer,
W.H. Sylvis of the iron molders. The purpose of the National Labor Union
was not merely to secure labor's standard demands touching hours, wages,
toward political action and radical opinions. Above all, it sought to
carry on its propaganda; but most of the cooperative enterprises failed,
political dissensions arose, and by 1872 the experiment had come to an
end.
experimenting, there grew up in the industrial world a more radical
organization known as the "Noble Order of the Knights of Labor." It was
signs, and pass words; "so that no spy of the boss can find his way into
skilled and unskilled, men and women, white and colored, into a mighty
By 1885, ten years after the national organization was established, it
boasted a membership of over 700,000. In philosophy, the Knights of
railways and other utilities and the formation of cooperative societies
to own and manage stores and factories.
prolonged, were often accompanied by violence, the organization alarmed
employers and the general public, raising up against itself a vigorous
opposition. Weaknesses within, as well as foes from without, started the
Knights on the path to dissolution. They waged more strikes than they
immediate gains in wages or the reduction of hours; when their hopes
increased by the appearance of the American Federation of Labor, a still
mightier organization composed mainly of skilled workers who held
strategic positions in industry. When they failed to secure the
effective support of the Federation in their efforts to organize the
unskilled, the employers closed in upon them; then the Knights declined
time they passed into the limbo of dead experiments.
=The Policies of the American Federation.=--Unlike the Knights of Labor,
the American Federation of Labor sought, first of all, to be very
practical in its objects and methods. It avoided all kinds of
socialistic theories and attended strictly to the business of organizing
particular craft whose interests were clearly the same. To prepare for
union. In order to permit action on a national scale, it gave the
While declaring that employers and employees had much in common, the
could not be determined in a single factory, no matter how amicable
might be the relations of the company and its workers in that particular
plant. For these reasons, the Federation declared company unions and
local shop committees inherently weak; it insisted that hours, wages,
and other labor standards should be fixed by general trade agreements
local modifications.
At the same time, the Federation, far from deliberately antagonizing
employers, sought to enlist their cooperation and support. It affiliated
with the National Civic Federation, an association of business men,
financiers, and professional men, founded in 1900 to promote friendly
relations in the industrial world. In brief, the American Federation of
Labor accepted the modern industrial system and, by organization within
unionists.
THE WIDER RELATIONS OF ORGANIZED LABOR
=The Socialists.=--The trade unionism "pure and simple," espoused by the
American Federation of Labor, seemed to involve at first glance nothing
but businesslike negotiations with employers. In practice it did not
work out that way. The Federation was only six years old when a new
organization, appealing directly for the labor vote--namely, the
Socialist Labor Party--nominated a candidate for President, launched
been long in germination. Before the Civil War, a number of reformers,
deeply moved by the poverty of the great industrial cities, had
earnestly sought relief in the establishment of cooperative or
communistic colonies. They believed that people should go into the
and clothing necessary for their support. For a time this movement
attracted wide interest, but it had little vitality. Nearly all the
colonies failed. Selfishness and indolence usually disrupted the best of
In the course of time this "Utopian" idea was abandoned, and another set
of socialist doctrines, claiming to be more "scientific," appeared
instead. The new school of socialists, adopting the principles of a
German writer and agitator, Karl Marx, appealed directly to workingmen.
It urged them to unite against the capitalists, to get possession of the
of railways, land, mines, mills, and other means of production. The
labor and to win elections. Like the other parties they put forward
school books, woman suffrage, heavy income taxes, and the referendum.
The Socialist party, founded in 1900, with Eugene V. Debs, the leader of
the Pullman strike, as its candidate, called for public ownership of all
trusts, monopolies, mines, railways; and the chief means of production.
In the course of time the vote of the latter organization rose to
In their appeal for votes, the socialists of every type turned first to
Federation, Samuel Gompers, on each occasion took the floor against
and practical grounds. He opposed too much public ownership, declaring
that the government was as likely as any private employer to oppress
Federation on the rock of politics, weaken it in its fight for higher
turn he was able to vanquish the socialists in the Federation, although
he could not prevent it from endorsing public ownership of the railways
=The Extreme Radicals.=--Some of the socialists, defeated in their
politics. One faction, the Industrial Workers of the World, founded in
1905, declared themselves opposed to all capitalists, the wages system,
employing class have nothing in common" and that trade unions only
pitted one set of workers against another set. They repudiated all
railways, mines, and mills of the country. This doctrine, so
revolutionary in tone, called down upon the extremists the condemnation
of the American Federation of Labor as well as of the general public. At
its convention in 1919, the Federation went on record as "opposed to
Bolshevism, I.W.W.-ism, and the irresponsible leadership that encourages
such a policy." It announced its "firm adherence to American ideals."
to the socialists did not mean, however, that it was indifferent to
political issues or political parties. On the contrary, from time to
time, at its annual conventions, it endorsed political and social
reforms, such as the initiative, referendum, and recall, the abolition
of child labor, the exclusion of Oriental labor, old-age pensions, and
government ownership. Moreover it adopted the policy of "rewarding
friends and punishing enemies" by advising members to vote for or
against candidates according to their stand on the demands of organized
[Illustration: _Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
This policy was pursued with especial zeal in connection with disputes
over the use of injunctions in labor controversies. An injunction is a
bill or writ issued by a judge ordering some person or corporation to do
trade union to refrain from interfering with non-union men or to
continue at work handling goods made by non-union labor; and he may fine
or imprison those who disobey his injunction, the penalty being
inflicted for "contempt of court." This ancient legal device came into
prominence in connection with nation-wide railway strikes in 1877. It
Aroused by the extensive use of the writ, organized labor demanded that
the power of judges to issue injunctions in labor disputes be limited by
the Republicans; they received from the former very specific and cordial
injunction as a new and highly dangerous form of oppression." Mr.
Gompers, while refusing to commit the Federation to Democratic politics,
that eighty per cent of the votes of the Federation had been cast for
the Democratic candidate. Again in 1912 the same policy was pursued. The
reward was the enactment in 1914 of a federal law exempting trade unions
from prosecution as combinations in restraint of trade, limiting the use
of the injunction in labor disputes, and prescribing trial by jury in
case of contempt of court. This measure was hailed by Mr. Gompers as the
"Magna Carta of Labor" and a vindication of his policy. As a matter of
fact, however, it did not prevent the continued use of injunctions
against trade unions. Nevertheless Mr. Gompers was unshaken in his
independent political party or endorse socialist or other radical
economic theories.
time these became heavy and grave. While industries were small and
conflicts were local in character, a strike seldom affected anybody but
the employer and the employees immediately involved in it. When,
Moreover, as increases in wages and reductions in hours often added
directly to the cost of living, the action of the unions affected the
For the purpose of meeting the issue raised by this state of affairs, it
before commissions of arbitration for decision and settlement. President
enacted a voluntary arbitration law applicable to the railways. The
authority of the federal government many contentions in the railway
submit all disputes to official tribunals of arbitration. Kansas
bill of the same year created a federal board of nine members to which
all railway controversies, not settled by negotiation, must be
speaking, both employers and employees opposed compulsory adjustments
without offering any substitute in case voluntary arbitration should not
=The Problems of Immigration.=--From its very inception, the American
Federation of Labor, like the Knights of Labor before it, was confronted
to our shores. In its effort to make each trade union all-inclusive, it
had to wrestle with a score or more languages. When it succeeded in
an influx of foreigners ready to work for lower wages and thus undermine
At the same time, persons outside the labor movement began to be
apprehensive as they contemplated the undoubted evil, as well as the
good, that seemed to be associated with the "alien invasion." They saw
tongues, reading only foreign newspapers, and looking to the Old World
alone for their ideas and their customs. They witnessed an expanding
army of total illiterates, men and women who could read and write no
language at all; while among those aliens who could read few there were
who knew anything of American history, traditions, and ideals. Official
reports revealed that over twenty per cent of the men of the draft army
during the World War could not read a newspaper or write a letter home.
men are in the United States only on a temporary sojourn, solely to make
money and return home with their savings. These men, willing to work for
=The Restriction of Immigration.=--In all this there was, strictly
speaking, no cause for surprise. Since the foundation of our republic
the policy of the government had been to encourage the coming of the
alien. For nearly one hundred years no restraining act was passed by
homestead act of 1862 and the contract immigration law of 1864. Not
until American workingmen came into open collision with cheap Chinese
measure of limitation on the statute books. After the discovery of gold,
starvation wages and indifferent to the conditions of living, they
threatened to cut the American standard to the point of subsistence. By
1876 the protest of American labor was loud and long and both the
for a term of ten years--later extended by legislation. In a little
while the demand arose for the exclusion of the Japanese as well. In
by which Japan agreed not to issue passports to her laborers authorizing
President was empowered to exclude any laborers who, having passports to
Canada, Hawaii, or Mexico, attempted to enter our country.
claimed by residents of the Coast that in spite of federal authority
buy land outright; and in other ways they discriminated against
Japanese citizens in the United States, and the government at Tokyo
international agreement. The Western states were fixed in their
persistent in asking that no badge of inferiority be attached to her
citizens. Subjected to pressure on both sides, the federal government
sought a way out of the deadlock.
Having embarked upon the policy of restriction in 1882, Congress readily
extended it. In that same year it barred paupers, criminals, convicts,
and the insane. Three years later, mainly owing to the pressure of the
Department to the Department of Commerce and Labor, in order to provide
for a more rigid execution of the law. In 1907 the classes of persons
denied admission were widened to embrace those suffering from physical
and mental defects and otherwise unfit for effective citizenship. When
the Department of Labor was established in 1913 the enforcement of the
was a former leader in the American Federation of Labor.
satisfied. Still organized labor protested and demanded more protection
battle in the passage of a bill excluding "all aliens over sixteen years
of age, physically capable of reading, who cannot read the English
language or some other language or dialect, including Hebrew or
Yiddish." Even President Wilson could not block it, for a two-thirds
opposed in many quarters. People of certain nationalities already in the
Many employers looked upon an increased labor supply as the means of
of countless voices, the discussion of these vital matters went on in
was a call for the "Americanization" of the alien already within our
the demand was intensified when it was found that many of the leaders
Innumerable programs for assimilating the alien to American life were
drawn up, and in 1919 a national conference on the subject was held in
Washington under the auspices of the Department of the Interior. All
were agreed that the foreigner should be taught to speak and write the
urged to lend aid in this vast undertaking. America, as ex-President
boarding-house."
=General References=
Samuel Gompers, _Labor and the Common Welfare_.
W.E. Walling, _Socialism as It Is_.
T.S. Adams and H. Sumner, _Labor Problems_.
J.G. Brooks, _American Syndicalism_ and _Social Unrest_.
P.F. Hall, _Immigration and Its Effects on the United States_.
Labor in American History_, pp. 11-44.
=Labor and Politics.=--Beard, _Short History_, pp. 33-46, 54-61,
Series), pp. 76-85.
=The Knights of Labor.=--Beard, _Short History_, pp. 116-126; Dewey,
=The American Federation of Labor--Organization and Policies.=--Beard,
_Short History_, pp. 86-112.
126-149.
History_, pp. 150-170.
=Questions=
1. What are the striking features of the new economic age?
2. Give Mr. Rockefeller's view of industrial democracy.
with their employees.
4. Sketch the rise and growth of the American Federation of Labor.
6. Describe the purposes and outcome of the National Labor Union and the
Knights of Labor.
7. State the chief policies of the American Federation of Labor.
10. What was the relation of the Federation to the extreme radicals? To
national politics? To the public?
11. Explain the injunction.
13. Outline the history of restrictions on immigration.
14. What problems arise in connection with the assimilation of the alien
to American life?
CHAPTER XXV
PRESIDENT WILSON AND THE WORLD WAR
women who do the daily work in our mines and factories, on our
sea are the underlying necessity of all prosperity." Thus spoke Woodrow
he gave the signal for work by summoning Congress in a special session
men" and indicated that he would assume the role of leadership. As an
evidence of his resolve, he appeared before Congress in person to read
he let it be known that he would not give his party any rest until it
fulfilled its pledges to the country. When Democratic Senators balked at
tariff reductions, they were sharply informed that the party had
plighted its word and that no excuses or delays would be tolerated.
DOMESTIC LEGISLATION
work, passing first the Underwood tariff act of 1913, which made a
downward revision in the rates of duty, fixing them on the average about
twenty-six per cent lower than the figures of 1907. The protective
element of foreign competition. As a part of the revenue act Congress
levied a tax on incomes as authorized by the sixteenth amendment to the
Constitution. The tax which roused such party passions twenty years
before was now accepted as a matter of course.
the first place, it continued the prohibition on the issuance of notes
by state banks and provided for a national currency. In the second
reserve board composed entirely of government officials. To prevent the
growth of a "central money power," it provided, in the third place, for
banks were required and certain other banks permitted to become members
expanding the currency, a step which the Democrats had long urged upon
the country, the issuance of paper money, under definite safeguards, was
authorized.
Mindful of the agricultural interest, ever dear to the heart of
Farm Loan Act of 1916, creating federal agencies to lend money on farm
been lent to farmers, the heaviest borrowing being in nine Western and
Southern states, with Texas in the lead.
=Anti-trust Legislation.=--The tariff and currency laws were followed by
three significant measures relative to trusts. Rejecting utterly the
announced that it was the purpose of the Democrats "to destroy monopoly
and maintain competition as the only effective instrument of business
liberty." The first step in this direction, the Clayton Anti-trust Act,
carried into great detail the Sherman law of 1890 forbidding and
penalizing combinations in restraint of interstate and foreign trade. In
trusts and to put all business on a competitive basis. Its terms were
empowered to inquire into the methods of corporations and lodge
only one respect was the severity of the Democratic policy relaxed. An
engaged in export trade, the purpose being to encourage large
The effect of this whole body of anti-trust legislation, in spite of
dissolved as a result of it. Startling investigations were made into
alleged abuses on the part of trusts; but it could hardly be said that
huge business concerns had lost any of their predominance in American
industry.
=Labor Legislation.=--By no mere coincidence, the Clayton Anti-trust law
and it exempted unions from prosecution as "combinations in restraint of
trade." It likewise defined and limited the uses which the federal
courts might make of injunctions in labor disputes and guaranteed trial
by jury to those guilty of disobedience (see p. 581).
greater liberty of contract to American sailors and requiring an
law that shipowners declared themselves unable to meet foreign
competition under its terms, owing to the low labor standards of other
countries.
Still more extraordinary than the Seamen's Act was the Adamson law of
1916 fixing a standard eight-hour work-day for trainmen on railroads--a
measure wrung from Congress under a threat of a great strike by the four
Railway Brotherhoods. This act, viewed by union leaders as a triumph,
called forth a bitter denunciation of "trade union domination," but it
was easier to criticize than to find another solution of the problem.
Three other laws enacted during President Wilson's administration were
popular in the labor world. One of them provided compensation for
federal employees injured in the discharge of their duties. Another
of the nation. A third prescribed for coal miners in Alaska an
eight-hour day and modern safeguards for life and health. There were
=Federal and State Relations.=--If the interference of the government
with business and labor represented a departure from the old idea of
"the less government the better," what can be said of a large body of
everywhere was one indication of the new tendency. Mr. Wilson had once
declared such legislation unconstitutional; the Supreme Court declared
under the guise of a tax on goods made by children below the age limit.
maintaining highways. The same year the Farm Loan Act projected the
federal government into the sphere of local money lending. In 1917
millions of dollars were granted to states in aid of vocational
education, incidentally imposing uniform standards throughout the
the policeman.
=The Prohibition Amendment.=--A still more significant form of
intervention in state affairs was the passage, in December, 1917, of an
was the climax of a historical movement extending over half a century.
nominated its first presidential candidate and inaugurated a campaign of
agitation. Though its vote was never large, the cause for which it
popular referendum abolished the liquor traffic within its borders. By
1917 at least thirty-two of the forty-eight were "dry." When the federal
amendment was submitted for approval, the ratification was surprisingly
swift. In a little more than a year, namely, on January 16, 1919, it was
annual messages urged upon Congress more autonomy for the Filipinos and
a definite promise of final independence. The result was the Jones
that the upper as well as the lower house of the Philippine legislature
should be elected by popular vote, and declared it to be the intention
of the United States to grant independence "as soon as a stable
the bill, is "a very satisfactory advance in our policy of extending to
elective and conferring American citizenship upon the inhabitants of the
=American Power in the Caribbean.=--While extending more self-government
to its dominions, the United States enlarged its sphere of influence in
the Caribbean. The supervision of finances in Santo Domingo, inaugurated
Wilson. In 1914 dissensions in the republic led to the landing of
the entire republic "in a state of military occupation." He proceeded to
making a plea for the restoration of independence to the republic. For
order. Elections were held under the supervision of American officers,
and a treaty was drawn up placing the management of Haitian finances and
our Secretary of State was careful to announce: "The United States
promoting this protectorate." Still it must be said that there were
vigorous protests on the part of natives and American citizens against
considering withdrawal.
In line with American policy in the West Indian waters was the purchase
in 1917 of the Danish Islands just off the coast of Porto Rico. The
strategic position of the islands, especially in relation to Haiti and
The third treaty brought an end to fifty years of bargaining and the
Stars and Stripes were raised over St. Croix, St. Thomas, St. John, and
suicidal," commented a New York newspaper, "for America, on the
threshold of a great commercial expansion in South America, to suffer a
the mouth of her Suez." On the mainland American power was strengthened
into Latin America, of which the operations in the Caribbean regions
were merely one phase, naturally carried Americans into Mexico to
develop the natural resources of that country. Under the iron rule of
short break until 1911, Mexico had become increasingly attractive to our
huge sums in Mexican lands, oil fields, and mines, and had laid the
foundations of a new industrial order. The severe regime instituted by
left the country.
Mexico now slid down the path to disorder. Revolutions and civil
commotions followed in swift succession. A liberal president, Madero,
installed as the successor to Diaz, was deposed in 1913 and brutally
murdered. Huerta, a military adventurer, hailed for a time as another
"strong man," succeeded Madero whose murder he was accused of
accepted the new government as lawful, the United States steadily
under the leadership of Carranza, a friend of Madero, Villa, a bandit of
generous pretensions, and Zapata, a radical leader of the peons. Without
recognized by the United States, held a precarious position which he
vigorously strove to strengthen against various revolutionary movements.
chieftain, Obregon, installed in power.
natural resources of the country, struck at the rights of foreign
violation of American rights.
President Wilson, soon after his inauguration, sent a commissioner to
Mexico to inquire into the situation. Although he declared a general
forces. In 1914 some American sailors at Tampico were arrested by a
Mexican officer; the Mexican government, although it immediately
released the men, refused to make the required apology for the incident.
juncture the governments of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile tendered their
good offices as mediators. After a few weeks of negotiation, during
from Vera Cruz and the incident closed.
under the command of General Pershing was quickly sent out to capture
the offenders. Against the protests of President Carranza, American
forces penetrated deeply into Mexico without effecting the object of
and the policy of "watchful waiting" was continued.
THE UNITED STATES AND THE EUROPEAN WAR
age-long jealousies of European nations, sharpened by new imperial
ambitions, broke out in another general conflict such as had shaken the
world in the days of Napoleon. On June 28, the heir to the
Austro-Hungarian throne was assassinated at Serajevo, the capital of
blame for this incident on the government of Serbia and made humiliating
demands on that country. Germany at once proposed that the issue should
be regarded as "an affair which should be settled solely between
Austria-Hungary and Serbia"; meaning that the small nation should be
Austria-Hungary against Serbia might bring Russia upon the field and
that it might therefore involve us in a war, in accordance with our
duties as allies. We could not, however, in these vital interests of
Austria-Hungary which were at stake, advise our ally to take a yielding
Every day of the fateful August, 1914, was crowded with momentous
events. On the 1st, Germany declared war on Russia. On the 2d, the
Belgium that they were preparing to violate the neutrality of his realm
on their way to Paris. On the same day, Great Britain, anxiously
Great Britain demanded of Germany respect for Belgian neutrality and,
failing to receive the guarantee, broke off diplomatic relations. On the
5th, the British prime minister announced that war had opened between
England and Germany. The storm now broke in all its pitiless fury.
=The State of American Opinion.=--Although President Wilson promptly
large majority of the American people were without doubt on the side of
Belgium and the horrors that accompanied German occupation were odious
as an autocratic power wielded in the interest of an ambitious military
party. The Kaiser, William II, and the Crown Prince were the symbols of
long and bitter struggle for home rule in Ireland, would have regarded
British defeat as a merited redress of ancient grievances.
Extremely sensitive to American opinion, but ill informed about it, the
German government soon began systematic efforts to present its cause to
the people of the United States in the most favorable light possible.
Dr. Bernhard Dernburg, the former colonial secretary of the German
newspapers, magazines, and periodicals with interviews, articles, and
York flowed a stream of pamphlets, leaflets, and cartoons. A magazine,
"The Fatherland," was founded to secure "fair play for Germany and
Austria." Several professors in American universities, who had received
Empires. The German language press, without exception it seems, the
National German Alliance, minor German societies, and Lutheran churches
came to the support of the German cause. Even the English language
papers, though generally favorable to the Entente Allies, opened their
columns in the interest of equal justice to the spokesmen for all the
contending powers of Europe.
Before two weeks had elapsed the controversy had become so intense that
loves America will act and speak in the true spirit of neutrality which
concerned.... We must be impartial in thought as well as in action, must
another."
=The Clash over American Trade.=--As in the time of the Napoleonic wars,
Americans trading with countries at peace as well as those at war. On
this point there existed on August 1, 1914, a fairly definite body of
principles by which nations were bound. Among them the following were of
merchant ship caught on the high seas was a legitimate prize of war
which might be seized and confiscated. In the second place, it was
agreed that "contraband of war" found on an enemy or neutral ship was a
if caught with forbidden goods was subject to seizure. In the third
had the right, if it could, to blockade the ports of an enemy and
prevent the ingress and egress of all ships; but such a blockade, to be
These general principles left undetermined two important matters: "What
is an effective blockade?" and "What is contraband of war?" The task of
answering these questions fell to Great Britain as mistress of the seas.
she declared the blockade to be none the less "effective" because her
navy was supreme. As to contraband of war Great Britain put such a broad
interpretation upon the term as to include nearly every important
article of commerce. Early in 1915 she declared even cargoes of grain
and flour to be contraband, defending the action on the ground that the
A new question arose in connection with American trade with the neutral
countries surrounding Germany. Great Britain early began to intercept
ships carrying oil, gasoline, and copper--all war materials of prime
Germany or would release goods for sale to Germans. On November 2, 1914,
open waters and that therefore the whole of the North Sea was a military
zone. Ships bound for Denmark, Norway, and Sweden were ordered to come
by the English Channel for inspection and sailing directions. In effect,
Americans were now licensed by Great Britain to trade in certain
commodities and in certain amounts with neutral countries.
necessity of a belligerent and constitutes restrictions upon the rights
of American citizens on the high seas, which are not justified by the
rules of international law or required under the principle of
self-preservation."
=Germany Begins the Submarine Campaign.=--Germany now announced that, on
and after February 18, 1915, the whole of the English Channel and the
waters around Great Britain would be deemed a war zone and that every
enemy ship found therein would be destroyed. The German decree added
that, as the British admiralty had ordered the use of neutral flags by
destruction if found in the forbidden area. It was clear that Germany
international law; but a submarine ordinarily could do nothing of the
sort. Of necessity the lives and the ships of neutrals, as well as of
belligerents, were put in mortal peril. This amazing conduct Germany
The response of the United States to the ominous German order was swift
American note added that the German imperial government would be held to
"strict accountability" and all necessary steps would be taken to
language, but the only response which it evoked from Germany was a
suggestion that, if Great Britain would allow food supplies to pass
American ship, _William P. Frye_, in the South Atlantic; on March 28, a
airplane dropped bombs on the American steamer _Cushing_. On the morning
advertisement, signed by the German Imperial Embassy, warning travelers
of the dangers in the war zone and notifying them that any who ventured
the _Lusitania_, a British steamer, sailed from New York for Liverpool.
On May 7, without warning, the ship was struck by two torpedoes and in a
few minutes went down by the bow, carrying to death 1153 persons
including 114 American men, women, and children. A cry of horror ran
terrible deed was almost universally condemned by public opinion.
=The _Lusitania_ Notes.=--On May 14, the Department of State at
Washington made public the first of three famous notes on the
_Lusitania_ case. It solemnly informed the German government that "no
warning that an unlawful and inhumane act will be committed can possibly
be accepted as an excuse or palliation for that act or as an abatement
of the responsibility for its commission." It called upon the German
government to disavow the act, make reparation as far as possible, and
caution to Germany that the government of the United States would not
"omit any word or any act necessary to the performance of its sacred
duty of maintaining the rights of the United States and its citizens and
of safeguarding their free exercise and enjoyment." The die was cast;
State, had resigned because the drift of President Wilson's policy was
not toward mediation but the strict maintenance of American rights, if
naval commanders continued their course of sinking merchant ships. In a
third and final note of July 21, 1915, President Wilson made it clear to
the rights of American citizens. Finally after much discussion and
shifting about, the German ambassador on September 1, 1915, sent a brief
note to the Secretary of State: "Liners will not be sunk by our
submarines without warning and without safety of the lives of
non-combatants, provided the liners do not try to escape or offer
resistance." Editorially, the New York _Times_ declared: "It is a
triumph not only of diplomacy but of reason, of humanity, of justice,
and of truth." The Secretary of State saw in it "a recognition of the
=The Presidential Election of 1916.=--In the midst of this crisis came
the presidential campaign. On the Republican side everything seemed to
depend upon the action of the Progressives. If the breach created in
1912 could be closed, victory was possible; if not, defeat was certain.
A promise of unity lay in the fact that the conventions of the
Republicans and Progressives were held simultaneously in Chicago. The
friends of Roosevelt hoped that both parties would select him as their
the federal Supreme Court who, as governor of New York, had won a
national reputation by waging war on "machine politicians."
In the face of the clamor for expressions of sympathy with one or the
other of the contending powers of Europe, the Republicans chose a middle
acceptance speech. By some it was interpreted to mean a firmer policy in
submarine menace. The Democrats, on their side, renominated President
Wilson by acclamation, reviewed with pride the legislative achievements
of the party, and commended "the splendid diplomatic victories of our
great President who has preserved the vital interests of our government
and its citizens and kept us out of war."
In the election which ensued President Wilson's popular vote exceeded
without warrant, as a great personal triumph for the President. He had
Progressive party practically disappeared, and the Socialists suffered a
severe set-back, falling far behind the vote of 1912.
convinced that his pacific policies had been profoundly approved by his
proposed to the Allied Powers that they enter into peace negotiations, a
nations asking them to avow "the terms upon which war might be
answered by presenting certain conditions precedent to a satisfactory
settlement. On January 22, 1917, President Wilson in an address before
in the establishment of a stable peace on the basis of certain
nationalities to freedom and self-government; the independence of
Poland; freedom of the seas; the reduction of armaments; and the
abolition of entangling alliances. The whole world was discussing the
official renewal of ruthless submarine warfare.
THE UNITED STATES AT WAR
German government intended to return to its former submarine policy,
President Wilson severed diplomatic relations with the German empire. At
the same time he explained to Congress that he desired no conflict with
Germany and would await an "overt act" before taking further steps to
without any warning and without regard to the loss of American lives.
menace. The reply of Congress on April 6 was a resolution, passed with
with Germany. Austria-Hungary at once severed diplomatic relations with
on the President's advice, declared war also on that "vassal of the
=American War Aims.=--In many addresses at the beginning and during the
our government in taking up arms. He first made it clear that it was a
"denied us the right to be neutral." Proof of that lay on every hand.
Agents of the German imperial government had destroyed American lives
and American property on the high seas. They had filled our communities
with spies. They had planted bombs in ships and munition works. They had
Though assailed in many ways and compelled to resort to war, the United
States sought no material rewards. "The world must be made safe for
political liberty. We have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no
conquest, no dominion. We seek no indemnities for ourselves."
In a very remarkable message read to Congress on January 8, 1918,
President Wilson laid down his famous "fourteen points" summarizing the
openly arrived at; absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas; the
removal, as far as possible, of trade barriers among nations; reduction
populations concerned; fair and friendly treatment of Russia; the
matter of Alsace-Lorraine; adjustment of Italian frontiers along the
league of nations to guarantee peace and establish justice among the
powers of the world. Democracy, the right of nations to determine their
own fate, a covenant of enduring peace--these were the ideals for which
the American people were to pour out their blood and treasure.
=The Selective Draft.=--The World War became a war of nations. The
service and all their resources, human and material, thrown into the
scale. For this reason, President Wilson summoned the whole people of
the United States to make every sacrifice necessary for victory.
Congress by law decreed that the national army should be chosen from all
intention of becoming citizens. By the first act of May 18, 1917, it
August, 1918, it extended them to eighteen and forty-five. From the men
American Expeditionary Force upholding the American cause on the
a team in which each man shall play the part for which he is best
should be stinted in no respect, the nation was called upon to place its
"conscription of wealth as well as men," meaning the support of the war
prevailed. Four great Liberty Loans were floated, all the agencies of
loan had four and a half million subscribers; the fourth more than
twenty million. Combined with loans were heavy taxes. A progressive tax
was laid upon incomes beginning with four per cent on incomes in the
lower ranges and rising to sixty-three per cent of that part of any
rising in amount to sixty per cent of the net income in excess of
distinguished economist, "is the high-water mark in the history of
taxation. Never before in the annals of civilization has an attempt been
the arms, munitions, supplies, and transportation required in the
gigantic undertaking. Between the declaration of war and the armistice,
Congress enacted law after law relative to food supplies, raw materials,
railways, mines, ships, forests, and industrial enterprises. No power
factories, ships at the wharves, trade with friendly countries, the
railways, banks, stores, private fortunes--all were mobilized and laid
under whatever obligations the government deemed imperative. Never was a
wheat and coal and to take almost any steps necessary to prevent
monopoly and excessive prices. By a series of measures, enlarging the
principles of the shipping act of 1916, ships and shipyards were brought
under public control and the government was empowered to embark upon a
for the period of the war the operation of the railways under a
presidential proclamation which was elaborated in March, 1918, by act of
Congress. In the summer of 1918 the express, telephone, and telegraph
business of the entire country passed under government control. By war
risk insurance acts allowances were made for the families of enlisted
instituted, and a system of national insurance was established in the
interest of the men in service. Never before in the history of the
country had the government taken such a wise and humane view of its
obligations to those who served on the field of battle or on the seas.
=The Espionage and Sedition Acts.=--By the Espionage law of June 15,
1917, and the amending law, known as the Sedition act, passed in May of
the following year, the government was given a drastic power over the
States; those who made false statements designed to interfere with the
military or naval forces of the United States; those who attempted to
severe and sweeping in its terms. It imposed heavy penalties upon any
person who used "abusive language about the government or institutions
of the country." It authorized the dismissal of any officer of the
and empowered the Postmaster General to close the mails to persons
violating the law. This measure, prepared by the Department of Justice,
encountered vigorous opposition in the Senate, where twenty-four
Republicans and two Democrats voted against it. Senator Johnson of
California denounced it as a law "to suppress the freedom of the press
in the United States and to prevent any man, no matter who he is, from
expressing legitimate criticism concerning the present government." The
constitutionality of the acts was attacked; but they were sustained by
the Supreme Court and stringently enforced.
THE LAUNCHING OF A SHIP AT THE GREAT NAVAL YARDS, NEWARK, N.J.]
=Labor and the War.=--In view of the restlessness of European labor
November, 1917, some anxiety was early expressed as to the stand which
support of all the unions. There was some dissent. The Socialist party
denounced the war as a capitalist quarrel; but all the protests combined
important boards and commissions dealing with industrial questions.
Trade union standards were accepted by the government and generally
applied in industry. The Department of Labor became one of the powerful
war centers of the nation. In a memorable address to the American
labor conditions should not be made unduly onerous by the war and
of labor's contribution to winning the war was embodied in the treaty of
peace, which provided for a permanent international organization to
"The league of nations has for its object the establishment of universal
peace," runs the preamble to the labor section of the treaty, "and such
a peace can be established only if it is based upon social justice....
men and ships, and a contingent of war vessels was sent to cooperate
submarines. Special effort was made to stimulate the production of
"submarine chasers" and "scout cruisers" to be sent to the danger zone.
Convoys were provided to accompany the transports conveying soldiers to
France. Before the end of the war more than three hundred American
vessels and 75,000 officers and men were operating in European waters.
Though the German fleet failed to come out and challenge the sea power
of the Allies, the battleships of the United States were always ready to
do their full duty in such an event. As things turned out, the service
wore down the submarine menace to Allied shipping.
into action; but there was no unnecessary delay. Soon after the
Allies. The regular army was enlarged and the troops of the national
Pershing, chosen head of the American Expeditionary Forces, reached
Paris and began preparations for the arrival of our troops. In June, the
vanguard of the army reached France. A slow and steady stream followed.
flood. During the period of the war the army was enlarged from about
of the front line as an American sector. In March, General Pershing
placed our forces at the disposal of General Foch, commander-in-chief of
salient in April, soon was engaged with the enemy, "taking with splendid
dash the town of Cantigny and all other objectives, which were organized
and held steadfastly against vicious counter attacks and galling
TROOPS RETURNING FROM FRANCE]
When the Germans launched their grand drives toward the Marne and Paris,
deep salient made by the Germans into the French lines, American
soldiers distinguished themselves by heroic action. They also played an
important role in the counter attack that "smashed" the salient and
drove the Germans back.
In September, American troops, with French aid, "wiped out" the German
great American drive to the northeast in the Argonne forest, while he
also cooperated with the British in the assault on the Hindenburg line.
stubborn resistance from the enemy. On the 6th of November, reported
General Pershing, "a division of the first corps reached a point on the
Meuse opposite Sedan, twenty-five miles from our line of departure. The
the end came. On the morning of November 11, the order to cease firing
went into effect. The German army was in rapid retreat and
demoralization had begun. The Kaiser had abdicated and fled into
fifty-second month, the World War, involving nearly every civilized
nation on the globe, was brought to a close. More than 75,000 American
soldiers and sailors had given their lives. More than 250,000 had been
[Illustration: WESTERN BATTLE LINES OF THE VARIOUS YEARS OF THE
WORLD WAR]
THE SETTLEMENT AT PARIS
and Associated Powers assembled to pronounce judgment upon the German
empire and its defeated satellites: Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, and
Japan had five delegates each. Belgium, Brazil, and Serbia were each
assigned three. Canada, Australia, South Africa, India, China, Greece,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru,
[Illustration: PREMIERS LLOYD GEORGE, ORLANDO AND CLEMENCEAU AND
PRESIDENT WILSON AT PARIS]
committed to a Supreme Council of ten representing the United States,
Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan. This was later reduced to five
members. Then Japan dropped out and finally Italy, leaving only
President Wilson and the Premiers, Lloyd George and Clemenceau, the
"Big Three," who assumed the burden of mighty decisions. On May 6, their
reservations or objections. The next day the treaty was presented to the
the legal basis of the general European settlement.
=The Terms of the Settlement.=--The combined treaties make a huge
dismembered. Russia was reduced by the creation of new states on the
west. Bulgaria was stripped of her gains in the recent Balkan wars.
Armenia, and Hedjaz. Italy, Greece, Rumania, and Serbia were enlarged by
cessions of territory and Serbia was transformed into the great state of
Jugoslavia.
with minor exceptions, was turned over to the Allied and Associated
Powers; Germany's total equipment for the future was limited to six
battleships and six light cruisers, with certain small vessels but no
manufacture of munitions restricted.
payments which might be ordered from time to time by an inter-allied
reparations commission. She was also required to deliver to Belgium,
while by way of additional compensation to France the rich coal basin of
the Saar was placed under inter-allied control to be exploited under
French administration for a period of at least fifteen years. Austria
and the other associates of Germany were also laid under heavy
other vessels were to be paid for on the basis of ton for ton.
colonies and Turkish provinces which were in a backward stage of
development should be placed under the tutelage of certain powers acting
as "mandatories" holding them in "a sacred trust of civilization." An
exception to the mandatory principle arose in the case of German rights
in Shantung, all of which were transferred directly to Japan. It was
signatures from the treaty.
=The League of Nations.=--High among the purposes which he had in mind
in summoning the nation to arms, President Wilson placed the desire to
put an end to war. All through the United States the people spoke of the
public. The President himself repeatedly declared that a general
association of nations must be formed to guard the peace and protect all
on opening the Fourth Liberty Loan campaign, "the constitution of the
League of Nations and the clear definition of its objects must be a
Nothing was more natural, therefore, than Wilson's insistence at Paris
treaty with Germany, the Covenant of the League of Nations, was due to
The agencies of the League of Nations were to be three in number: (1) a
one delegate from each country, dominion, or self-governing colony
(including Canada, Australia, South Africa, New Zealand, and India); (3)
The duties imposed on the League and the obligations accepted by its
formulate a scheme for the reduction of armaments and to submit a plan
members of the League (Article X) were to respect and preserve as
political independence of all the associated nations. They were to
not be adjusted by diplomacy and in no case to resort to war until three
months after the award. Should any member disregard its covenants, its
military measures to be taken. In case the decision in any arbitration
formed to promote the peace of the world. They were quickly approved by
=The Treaty in the United States.=--When the treaty was presented to the
United States Senate for approval, a violent opposition appeared. In
that chamber the Republicans had a slight majority and a two-thirds vote
was necessary for ratification. The sentiment for and against the treaty
ran mainly along party lines; but the Republicans were themselves
divided. The major portion, known as "reservationists," favored
ratification with certain conditions respecting American rights; while a
small though active minority rejected the League of Nations in its
this Republican opposition lay partly in the terms of peace imposed on
Germany and partly in the Covenant of the League of Nations. Exception
was taken to the clauses which affected the rights of American citizens
in property involved in the adjustment with Germany, but the burden of
criticism was directed against the League. Article X guaranteeing
against external aggression the political independence and territorial
heavy fire; while the treatment accorded to China and the sections
and dangerous." As an outcome of their deliberations, the Republicans
proposed a long list of reservations which touched upon many of the
vital parts of the treaty. These were rejected by President Wilson as
amounting in effect to a "nullification of the treaty." As a deadlock
ensued the treaty was definitely rejected, owing to the failure of its
[Illustration: EUROPE]
=The League of Nations in the Campaign of 1920.=--At this juncture the
presidential campaign of 1920 opened. The Republicans, while condemning
the terms of the proposed League, endorsed the general idea of an
international agreement to prevent war. Their candidate, Senator
definitely whether the League devised at Paris could be recast in such a
States, demanded "the immediate ratification of the treaty without
reservations which would impair its essential integrity." The Democratic
that the United States should "go into the League," without closing the
door to mild reservations; he appealed to the country largely on that
issue. The election of Senator Harding, in an extraordinary "landslide,"
coupled with the return of a majority of Republicans to the Senate, made
uncertain American participation in the League of Nations.
=The United States and International Entanglements.=--Whether America
entered the League or not, it could not close its doors to the world and
escape perplexing international complications. It had ever-increasing
financial and commercial connections with all other countries. Our
associates in the recent war were heavily indebted to our government.
The prosperity of American industries depended to a considerable extent
upon the recovery of the impoverished and battle-torn countries of
compelled by force of circumstances to adopt a Russian policy. The
government of the Czar had been overthrown by a liberal revolution,
"dictatorship." The Bolsheviki, or majority faction of the socialists,
the general settlement at Paris in 1919, our government, while
civilization and undertook to lay down for all countries the principles
which should govern intercourse with Russia.
World War, wholly apart from the terms of peace or the League of
Nations. The United States had participated in a general European
conflict which changed the boundaries of countries, called into being
new nations, and reduced the power and territories of the vanquished.
to cooperate with the victors in any settlement of Europe's
difficulties. By no conceivable process, therefore, could America be
become impossible. Within three hundred years from the founding of the
tiny settlements at Jamestown and Plymouth, America, by virtue of its
institutions, its population, its wealth, and its commerce, had become
first among the nations of the earth. By moral obligations and by
practical interests its fate was thus linked with the destiny of all
SUMMARY OF DEMOCRACY AND THE WORLD WAR
The astounding industrial progress that characterized the period
following the Civil War bequeathed to the new generation many perplexing
problems connected with the growth of trusts and railways, the
industrial cities, the exhaustion of the free land, and the acquisition
When the land was all gone, American economic conditions inevitably
Though the new economic questions had been vigorously debated in many
circles before his day, it was President Roosevelt who first discussed
fortunes were being made in business creating inequalities in
opportunity; he favored reducing them by income and inheritance taxes.
Industries were disturbed by strikes; he pressed arbitration upon
a less favorable position to bargain with capital and therefore should
organize in unions for collective bargaining. There had been wrong-doing
on the part of certain great trusts; those responsible should be
punished.
The spirit of reform was abroad in the land. The spoils system was
"rings and bosses." The United States Senate was called "a millionaires'
club." Poverty and misery were observed in the cities. State
legislatures and city governments were accused of corruption.
service reform was approved. The Australian ballot, popular election of
Senators, the initiative, referendum, and recall, commission and city
pensions for widows, the control of housing in the cities--these and a
hundred other reforms were adopted and tried out. The national watchword
The spirit of reform broke into both political parties. It appeared in
disrupted the Republicans temporarily in 1912 when the Progressive party
Governor Wilson, to make a "progressive appeal" to the voters. It
inspired a considerable program of national legislation under President
Wilson's two administrations.
In the age of change, four important amendments to the federal
constitution, the first in more than forty years, were adopted. The
assured popular election of Senators. The eighteenth made prohibition
In the sphere of industry, equally great changes took place. The major
portion of the nation's business passed into the hands of corporations.
In all the leading industries of the country labor was organized into
trade unions and federated in a national organization. The power of
struggles, their rights, and their place in the economy of the nation
raised problems of the first magnitude.
While the country was engaged in a heated debate upon its domestic
issues, the World War broke out in Europe in 1914. As a hundred years
before, American rights upon the high seas became involved at once. They
set at naught the rules of civilized warfare upon the sea. Warnings from
upon the nation to take up arms against an assailant that had in effect
declared war upon America. The answer was swift and firm. The national
resources, human and material, were mobilized. The navy was enlarged, a
draft army created, huge loans floated, heavy taxes laid, and the spirit
power that threatened to dominate Europe and the World.
In the end, American financial, naval, and military assistance counted
heavily in the scale. American sailors scoured the seas searching for
When victory crowned the arms of the powers united against Germany,
covenant binding the nations in a permanent association for the
settlement of international disputes. This treaty, the President offered
refused to ratify the treaty. World politics then became an issue in the
could close its doors and windows against all mankind, the victor in the
election, Senator Harding, of Ohio, knew better. The election returns
were hardly announced before he began to ask the advice of his
shall America--first among the nations of the earth in wealth and
power--assume at the council table of the world?"
=General References=
H.P. Willis, _The Federal Reserve_.
Theodore Roosevelt, _America and the World War_.
E.E. Robinson and V.J. West, _The Foreign Policy of Woodrow Wilson_.
J.S. Bassett, _Our War with Germany_.
J.B. McMaster, _The United States in the World War_.
=President Wilson's First Term.=--Elson, _History of the United States_,
Nation Series), pp. 209-226.
=Trust and Labor Legislation.=--Ogg, pp. 232-236.
=Legislation Respecting the Territories.=--Ogg, pp. 236-245.
=American Interests in the Caribbean.=--Ogg, pp. 246-265.
=American Interests in the Pacific.=--Ogg, pp. 304-324.
=Mexican Affairs.=--Haworth, pp. 388-395; Ogg, pp. 284-304.
384-399; Elson, pp. 951-970.
=Mobilizing the Nation.=--Haworth, pp. 441-453.
=The Peace Settlement.=--Haworth, pp. 475-497; Elson, pp. 971-982.
=Questions=
1. Enumerate the chief financial measures of the Wilson administration.
2. What was the Wilson policy toward trusts? Toward labor?
3. Review again the theory of states' rights. How has it fared in recent
5. Outline American-Mexican relations under Wilson.
7. Account for the divided state of opinion in America.
8. Review the events leading up to the War of 1812. Compare them with
the events from 1914 to 1917.
how they were violated.
10. What American rights were assailed in the submarine campaign?
11. Give Wilson's position on the _Lusitania_ affair.
12. How did the World War affect the presidential campaign of 1916?
16. Review the part of the navy in the war. The army.
17. How were the terms of peace formulated?
18. Enumerate the principal results of the war.
19. Describe the League of Nations.
21. Can there be a policy of isolation for America?
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more
for the common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the
blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and
establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
ARTICLE I
SECTION 2. 1. The House of Representatives shall be composed of members
electors in each State shall have the qualifications requisite for
2. No person shall be a representative who shall not have attained to
the age of twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the
United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that
State in which he shall be chosen.
several States which may be included within this Union, according to
whole number of free persons, including those bound to service for a
other persons.[3] The actual enumeration shall be made within three
by law direct. The number of representatives shall not exceed one for
representative; and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of
New Hampshire shall be entitled to choose three, Massachusetts eight,
4. When vacancies happen in the representation from any State, the
executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such
vacancies.
5. The House of Representatives shall choose their speaker and other
SECTION 3. 1. The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two
senators from each State, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six
years; and each senator shall have one vote.[4]
2. Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first
vacancies happen by resignation, or otherwise, during the recess of the
legislature of any State, the executive thereof may make temporary
appointments until the next meeting of the legislature, which shall then
fill such vacancies.[5]
3. No person shall be a senator who shall not have attained to the age
shall be chosen.
4. The Vice-President of the United States shall be President of the
exercise the office of President of the United States.
sitting for that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the
President of the United States is tried, the chief justice shall
preside: And no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of
two-thirds of the members present.
removal from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office
judgment, and punishment, according to law.
alter such regulations, except as to the places of choosing senators.
SECTION 5. 1. Each House shall be the judge of the elections, returns
from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the attendance of
absent members, in such manner, and under such penalties as each House
may provide.
two-thirds, expel a member.
any question shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present, be
consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other
place than that in which the two Houses shall be sitting.
SECTION 6. 1. The senators and representatives shall receive a
compensation for their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out
of the Treasury of the United States. They shall in all cases, except
2. No senator or representative shall, during the time for which he was
elected, be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the
office under the United States, shall be a member of either House during
his continuance in office.
as on other bills.
2. Every bill, which shall have passed the House of Representatives; and
of the United States; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not he
shall return it with his objections to that House, in which it shall
two-thirds of that House shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent,
likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two-thirds of that House,
it shall become a law. But in all such cases the votes of both Houses
voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each
House respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President
him, the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it,
unless the Congress by their adjournment prevent its return, in which
case it shall not be a law.
3. Every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the
Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a
United States and before the same shall take effect, shall be approved
by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of
the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the rules and
limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.
duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the
common defence and general welfare of the United States; but all duties,
3. To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several
5. To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and
6. To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and
7. To establish post offices and post roads;
8. To promote the progress of science and useful arts by securing for
limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their
9. To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court;
seas, and offences against the law of nations;
concerning captures on land and water;
13. To provide and maintain a navy;
Union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions;
of the United States, reserving to the States respectively the
appointment of the officers, and the authority of training the militia
17. To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such
particular States and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the
places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the State in which
into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this
Constitution in the government of the United States, or in any
department or officer thereof.
SECTION 9. 1. The migration or importation of such persons as any of the
States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited
by the Congress prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight,
dollars for each person.
2. The privilege of the writ of _habeas corpus_ shall not be suspended,
3. No bill of attainder or _ex post facto_ law shall be passed.
4. No capitation, or other direct, tax shall be laid, unless in
proportion to the census or enumeration hereinbefore directed to be
6. No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue
to the ports of one State over those of another: nor shall vessels bound
to, or from, one State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in
another.
appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of the
receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published from
time to time.
person, holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without
the consent of the Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office,
confederation; grant letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit
law impairing the obligation of contracts, or grant any title of
nobility.
2. No State shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts
or duties on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary
for executing its inspection laws: and the net produce of all duties and
of the Treasury of the United States; and all such laws shall be subject
to the revision and control of the Congress.
engage in war unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as
will not admit of delay.
ARTICLE II
United States of America. He shall hold his office during the term of
term, be elected, as follows:
2. Each State shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof
may direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of senators
but no senator or representative, or person holding an office of trust
two persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same
State with themselves. And they shall make a list of all the persons
voted for, and of the number of votes for each; which list they shall
sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of
the United States, directed to the president of the Senate. The
President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House
of Representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall then
President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors
appointed; and if there be more than one who have such majority, and
have an equal number of votes, then the House of Representatives shall
immediately choose by ballot one of them for President; and if no person
have a majority, then from the five highest on the list the said House
President, the votes shall be taken by States, the representation from
each State having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a
member or members from two-thirds of the States and a majority of all
the States shall be necessary to a choice. In every case, after the
of the electors shall be the Vice-President. But if there should remain
two or more who have equal votes, the Senate shall choose from them by
day on which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same
throughout the United States.
4. No person except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United
States, at the time of the adoption of this Constitution, shall be
eligible to that office who shall not have attained to the age of
thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a resident within the United
States.
5. In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death,
inability both of the President and Vice-President, declaring what
officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall act
accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be
elected.
6. The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the
period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive
within that period any other emolument from the United States, or any of
them.
7. Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the
following oath or affirmation:--"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the
Constitution of the United States."
impeachment.
2. He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present
consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other officers of the
and which shall be established by law: but the Congress may by law vest
3. The President shall have power to fill all vacancies that may happen
SECTION 3. He shall from time to time give to the Congress information
on the state of the Union, and recommend to their consideration such
measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on
case of disagreement between them, with respect to the time of
adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper;
he shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers; he shall take
officers of the United States.
SECTION 4. The President, Vice-President, and all civil officers of the
conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.
ARTICLE III
time to time ordain and establish. The judges, both of the Supreme and
inferior courts, shall hold their offices during good behaviour, and
equity, arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States,
all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction;--to controversies to
or more States;--between a State and citizens of another
State;[9]--between citizens of different States;--between citizens of
the same State claiming lands under grants of different States;--and
or subjects.
2. In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and
to law and fact, with such exceptions and under such regulations as the
Congress shall make.
jury; and such trial shall be held in the State where the said crimes
shall have been committed; but when not committed within any State, the
trial shall be at such place or places as the Congress may by law have
directed.
levying war against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them
open court.
2. The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason,
except during the life of the person attainted.
ARTICLE IV
the Congress may by general laws prescribe the manner in which such
acts, records, and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.
who shall flee from justice, and be found in another State, shall on
delivered up, to be removed to the State having jurisdiction of the
3. No person held to service or labor in one State, under the laws
thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or
regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labor, but shall
jurisdiction of any other State; nor any State be formed by the junction
legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress.
2. The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful
rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property
any particular State.
SECTION 4. The United States shall guarantee to every State in this
Union a republican form of government, and shall protect each of them
against invasion; and on application of the legislature, or of the
executive (when the legislature cannot be convened), against domestic
The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem it
necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the
application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the several States,
shall call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either case,
when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several
States, or by conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the
other mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress; provided
hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first and fourth
clauses in the ninth Section of the first article; and that no State,
without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the
ARTICLE VI
1. All debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the
adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United
States under this Constitution, as under the Confederation.
2. This Constitution and the laws of the United States which shall be
under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of
the land; and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything
notwithstanding.
the several State legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers,
under the United States.
ARTICLE VII
Done in Convention by the unanimous consent of the States present the
seventeenth day of September in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-seven and of the independence of the United States of
America the twelfth. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our
     G^O. WASHINGTON--
     Presidt. and Deputy from Virginia
[and thirty-eight members from all the States except Rhode Island.]
Articles in addition to, and amendment of, the Constitution of the
United States of America, proposed by Congress, and ratified by the
legislatures of the several States pursuant to the fifth article of the
ARTICLE I[10]
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
ARTICLE II
A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free
State, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be
infringed.
the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
prescribed by law.
ARTICLE IV
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers,
and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
ARTICLE V
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous
cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in
due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use,
without just compensation.
ARTICLE VI
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have
been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and
cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against
him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor,
and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.
twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no
fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined in any court of the
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
ARTICLE IX
The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
ARTICLE X
The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor
or to the people.
ARTICLE XI[11]
The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend
to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the
United States by citizens of another State, or by citizens or subjects
The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot
for President and Vice-President, one of whom at least shall not be an
inhabitant of the same State with themselves; they shall name in their
ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the
person voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists
shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the
shall then be counted;--The person having the greatest number of votes
for President, shall be the President, if such number be a majority of
the whole number of electors appointed; and if no person have such
three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of
in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the
day of March next following, then the Vice-President shall act as
President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional
disability of the President. The person having the greatest number of
have a majority, then from the two highest members on the list, the
Senate shall choose the Vice-President; a quorum for the purpose shall
consist of two-thirds of the whole number of senators, and a majority of
ARTICLE XIII[13]
SECTION 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a
punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted,
jurisdiction.
SECTION 2. Congress shall have power to enforce this article by
SECTION 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and
and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any
United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty,
or property without due process of law; nor deny to any person within
SECTION 2. Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States
to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and
executive and judicial officers of a State, or the members of the
State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States,
proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the
whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.
SECTION 3. No person shall be a senator or representative in Congress,
military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having
previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of
the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an
of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion
SECTION 4. The validity of the public debt of the United States,
authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and
bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall
assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or
emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations, and claims
shall be held illegal and void.
SECTION 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate
legislation, the provisions of this article.
ARTICLE XV[15]
SECTION 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not
race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from
qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the
State legislature.
the executive authority of each State shall issue writs of election to
fill such vacancies: _Provided_ that the legislature of any State may
empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the
This amendment shall not be so construed as to effect the election or
term of any senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the
Constitution.
ARTICLE XVIII[18]
SECTION 1. After one year from the ratification of this article the
manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the
importation thereof into, or the exportation thereof from the United
beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.
SECTION 2. The Congress and the several States shall have concurrent
power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
SECTION 3. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been
ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of the
ARTICLE XIX[19]
The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied
POPULATION OF THE UNITED STATES, BY STATES: 1920, 1910, 1900
+---------------------+--------------------------------------------+
+                     +--------------+--------------+--------------+
+---------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
|Alabama              |   2,348,174  |   2,138,093  |   1,828,697  |
|Arizona              |     333,903  |     204,354  |     122,931  |
|Arkansas             |   1,752,204  |   1,574,449  |   1,311,564  |
|Connecticut          |   1,380,631  |   1,114,756  |     908,420  |
|Florida              |     968,470  |     752,619  |     528,542  |
|Idaho                |     431,866  |     325,594  |     161,772  |
|Indiana              |   2,930,390  |   2,700,876  |   2,516,462  |
|Maine                |     768,014  |     742,371  |     694,466  |
|Maryland             |   1,449,661  |   1,295,346  |   1,188,044  |
|Massachusetts        |   3,852,356  |   3,366,416  |   2,805,346  |
|Michigan             |   3,668,412  |   2,810,173  |   2,420,982  |
|Mississippi          |   1,790,618  |   1,797,114  |   1,551,270  |
|Missouri             |   3,404,055  |   3,293,335  |   3,106,665  |
|Montana              |     548,889  |     376,053  |     243,329  |
|Nebraska             |   1,296,372  |   1,192,214  |   1,066,300  |
|Nevada               |      77,407  |      81,875  |      42,335  |
|New Mexico           |     360,350  |     327,301  |     195,310  |
|New York             |  10,384,829  |   9,113,614  |   7,268,894  |
|North Carolina       |   2,559,123  |   2,206,287  |   1,893,810  |
|North Dakota         |     645,680  |     577,056  |     319,146  |
|Ohio                 |   5,759,394  |   4,767,121  |   4,157,545  |
|Oklahoma             |   2,028,283  |   1,657,155  |     790,391  |
|Pennsylvania         |   8,720,017  |   7,665,111  |   6,302,115  |
|Rhode Island         |     604,397  |     542,610  |     428,556  |
|Tennessee            |   2,337,885  |   2,184,789  |   2,020,616  |
|Texas                |   4,663,228  |   3,896,542  |   3,048,710  |
|Virginia             |   2,309,187  |   2,061,612  |   1,854,184  |
|Washington           |   1,356,621  |   1,141,990  |     518,103  |
|West Virginia        |   1,463,701  |   1,221,119  |     958,800  |
|Wisconsin            |   2,632,067  |   2,333,860  |   2,069,042  |
|Wyoming              |     194,402  |     145,965  |      92,531  |
FOOTNOTES:
[5] _Ibid._, p. 641.
Proclaimed to be in force Dec. 15, 1791.
[11] Proposed Sept. 5, 1794. Declared in force January 8, 1798.
[13] Adopted in 1865.
[14] Adopted in 1868.
[16] Passed July, 1909; proclaimed February 25, 1913.
[17] Passed May, 1912, in lieu of paragraph one, Section 3, Article I,
relates to the filling of vacancies; proclaimed May 31, 1913.
[18] Ratified January 16, 1919.
TABLE OF PRESIDENTS
NAME                    STATE  PARTY     YEAR IN    VICE-PRESIDENT
1 George Washington      Va.    Fed.    1789-1797   John Adams
2 John Adams             Mass.  Fed.    1797-1801   Thomas Jefferson
3 Thomas Jefferson       Va.    Rep.    1801-1809   Aaron Burr
4 James Madison          Va.    Rep.    1809-1817   George Clinton
                                                    Elbridge Gerry
5 James Monroe           Va.    Rep.    1817-1825   Daniel D. Tompkins
6 John Q. Adams          Mass.  Rep.    1825-1829   John C. Calhoun
10 John Tyler[20]        Va.    Whig    1841-1845
11 James K. Polk         Tenn.  Dem.    1845-1849   George M. Dallas
12 Zachary Taylor        La.    Whig    1849-1850   Millard Fillmore
13 Millard Fillmore[20]  N.Y.   Whig    1850-1853
15 James Buchanan        Pa.    Dem.    1857-1861   J.C. Breckinridge
                                                    Andrew Johnson
17 Andrew Johnson[20]    Tenn.  Rep.    1865-1869
18 Ulysses S. Grant      Ill.   Rep.    1869-1877   Schuyler Colfax
                                                    Henry Wilson
22 Grover Cleveland      N.Y.   Dem.    1885-1889   Thomas A. Hendricks
23 Benjamin Harrison     Ind.   Rep.    1889-1893   Levi P. Morton
24 Grover Cleveland      N.Y.   Dem.    1893-1897   Adlai E. Stevenson
25 William McKinley      Ohio   Rep.    1897-1901   Garrett A. Hobart
                                                    Theodore Roosevelt
29 Warren G. Harding     Ohio   Rep.    1921-       Calvin Coolidge
[20] Promoted from the vice-presidency on the death of the president.
POPULATION OF THE OUTLYING POSSESSIONS: 1920 AND 1910
                AREA                    |     1920     |     1910
----------------------------------------+--------------+---------------
United States with outlying possessions |117,857,509   | 101,146,530
Continental United States               |105,708,771   | 91,972,266
Outlying Possessions                    | 12,148,738   |  9,174,264
                                        +--------------|---------------
  American Samoa                        |      8,056   |      7,251[21]
  Porto Rico                            |  1,299,809   |  1,118,012
  Military  and  naval,  etc.,  service |              |
    abroad                              |    117,238   |     55,608
  Philippine Islands                    |10,350,640[22]|  7,635,426[23]
FOOTNOTES:
[23] Population in 1903.
[25] Population in 1911.
A TOPICAL SYLLABUS
treatment of history, there is now a marked tendency in the direction of
understood only in relation to the forces of the time. For that reason,
       1. Diversified character: English, Scotch-Irish, Irish, Jews,
          system (23-25, 411).
          (13-17).
     III. Immigration between 1789-1890.
       1. Nationalities: English, Irish, Germans, and Scandinavians
       2. Relations to American life (432-433, 445).
     IV. Immigration and immigration questions after 1890.
       1. Change in nationalities (410-411).
       2. Changes in economic opportunities (411).
       3. Problems of congestion and assimilation (410).
       4. Relations to labor and illiteracy (582-586).
       6. The restriction of immigration (583-585).
       4. Annexation of Texas, 1845 (278-281).
          territory at close of Mexican War, 1848 (282-283).
       8. Purchase of Alaska from Russia, 1867 (479).
       10. Annexation of Hawaii, 1898 (484).
           close of Spanish War, 1898 (493-494).
       12. Acquisition of Panama Canal strip, 1904 (508-510).
       14. Extension of protectorate over Haiti, Santo Domingo, and
     II. Development of colonial self-government.
       1. Hawaii (485).
     III. Sea power.
       1. In American Revolution (118).
       3. In the Civil War (353-354).
       5. In the Caribbean region (512-519).
       6. In the Pacific (447-448, 481).
       7. The role of the American navy (515).
=The Westward Advance of the People=
       1. Government and land system (217-231).
       2. The routes (222-224).
       3. The settlers (221-223, 228-230).
       4. Relations with the East (230-236).
     II. Beyond the Mississippi.
       2. The upper valley (275-276).
       1. Cattle ranges and cowboys (276-278, 431-432).
       2. The free homesteads (432-433).
       1. Peculiarities of the West (433-440).
       2. The railways (425-431).
=The Wars of American History=
     II. Early colonial wars: King William's, Queen Anne's, and King
         George's (59).
     III. French and Indian War (Seven Years' War), 1754-1763 (59-61).
     V. The War of 1812, 1812-1815 (193-201).
     VI. The Mexican War, 1845-1848 (276-284).
     VIII. The Spanish War, 1898 (485-497).
         (596-625).
     I. Development of the American system of government.
       1. Origin and growth of state government.
              (4-5), and proprietary system (5-6).
         _b._ Government of the colonies (48-53).
         _f._ Growth of manhood suffrage (238-244).
         _g._ Nullification and state sovereignty (180-182, 251-257).
         _h._ The doctrine of secession (345-346).
         _j._ Political reform--direct government--initiative,
              referendum, and recall (540-544).
       2. Origin and growth of national government.
         _a._ British imperial control over the colonies (64-72).
         _g._ Development of the federal Constitution.
           (2) Twelfth amendment--election of President (184, note).
           (3) Amendments 13-15--Civil War settlement (358, 366, 369,
               370, 374, 375).
           (4) Sixteenth amendment--income tax (528-529).
           (7) Nineteenth amendment--woman suffrage (563-568).
       3. Development of the suffrage.
              (110, 238-240).
         _d._ Extension of manhood suffrage (241-244).
         _e._ Extension and limitation of negro suffrage (373-375,
     II. Relation of government to economic and social welfare.
       1. Debt and currency.
         _b._ Revolutionary currency and debt (125-127).
         _c._ Disorders under Articles of Confederation (140-141).
         _d._ Powers of Congress under the Constitution to coin money
              (_see_ Constitution in the Appendix).
         _f._ Second United States bank notes (257).
         _h._ Civil War greenbacks and specie payment (352-353, 454).
         _i._ The Civil War debt (252).
         _k._ Demonetization of silver and silver legislation
         _m._ The federal reserve notes (589).
         _n._ Liberty bonds (606).
       2. Banking systems.
         _a._ The first United States bank (167).
         _e._ The national banking system of 1864 (369).
         _a._ British colonial system (69-72).
         _c._ The first tariff under the Constitution (150, 167-168).
         _f._ Tariff and nullification (254-256).
         _g._ Development to the Civil War--attitude of South and West
              (264, 309-314, 357).
         _i._ Revival of the tariff controversy under Cleveland (422).
         _j._ Tariff legislation after 1890--McKinley bill (422),
       4. Foreign and domestic commerce and transportation
         _a._ British imperial regulations (69-72).
         _b._ Confusion under Articles of Confederation (140).
         _c._ Provisions of federal Constitution (150).
         _d._ Internal improvements--aid to roads, canals, etc.
              (230-236).
         _e._ Aid to railways (403).
         _f._ Service of railways (402).
         _h._ Control of trusts and corporations (461-462, 589-590).
       5. Land and natural resources.
         _d._ Irrigation and reclamation (434-436, 523-525).
         _e._ Conservation of natural resources (523-526).
       6. Legislation advancing human rights and general welfare
              negroes (357-358, 373-375).
         _b._ Extension of civil and political rights to women
              (554-568).
              579-581, 590-591).
         _d._ Control of public utilities (547-549).
     I. The Federalists _versus_ the Anti-Federalists [Jeffersonian
       2. Anti-Federalist leaders: Jefferson, Madison, Monroe.
       3. Issues: funding the debt, assumption of state debts, first
          Sedition acts.
         of no organized party opposition (248).
          Whigs [or National Republicans] from about 1832 to 1856
       1. Democratic leaders: Jackson, Van Buren, Calhoun, Benton.
       3. Issues: second United States bank, tariff, nullification,
     IV. The Democrats _versus_ the Republicans from about 1856 to the
       1. Democratic leaders: Jefferson Davis, Tilden, Cleveland,
          Bryan, and Wilson.
       2. Republican leaders: Lincoln, Blaine, McKinley, Roosevelt.
          taxation, trusts, railways, foreign policies, imperialism,
          labor questions, and policies with regard to land and
     V. Minor political parties.
          (306-307).
       2. Since the Civil War: Greenback (463-464), Populist (464),
          Liberal Republican (420), Socialistic (577-579), Progressive
=The Economic Development of the United States=
       1. The colonial land system: freehold, plantation, and manor
          (20-25).
       2. Development of the freehold in the West (220-221, 228-230).
       4. The cattle range and cowboy (431-432).
       7. Movement for the conservation of resources (523-526).
     II. Industry.
       1. The rise of local and domestic industries (28-32).
       2. British restrictions on American enterprise (67-69, 70-72).
       4. Development of industry previous to the Civil War (295-307).
       5. Great progress of industry after the war (401-406).
       6. Rise and growth of trusts and combinations (406-412,
       1. Extent of colonial trade and commerce (32-35).
       3. Effects of the Revolution and the Constitution
       4. Growth of American shipping (195-196).
       5. Waterways and canals (230-236).
       6. Rise and extension of the railway system (298-300).
          (304-307).
       3. The Knights of Labor (575-576).
       4. The American Federation of Labor (573-574).
         _b._ Relations to politics (579-581).
         _c._ Contests with socialists and radicals (577-579).
         _d._ Problems of immigration (582-585).
       5. The relations of capital and labor.
         _a._ The corporation and labor (410, 570-571).
         _c._ Welfare work (573).
         _e._ Arbitration (581-582).
=American Foreign Relations=
     I. Colonial period.
       1. Indian relations (57-59).
       3. The French alliance of 1778 (128-130).
       2. Questions arising out of European wars [1793-1801]
       4. War of 1812 (199-201).
       5. Monroe Doctrine and Holy Alliance (205-207).
       6. Maine boundary--Webster-Ashburton treaty (265).
       7. Oregon boundary (284-286).
       8. Attitude of Great Britain during Civil War (354-355).
       11. The Venezuelan question (482-484).
       12. British policy during Spanish-American War (496-497).
       13. Controversy over blockade, 1914-1917 (598-600).
       14. The World War (603-620).
     IV. Relations with France.
       1. The colonial wars (59-61).
       2. The French alliance of 1778 (128-130).
       4. Commercial questions arising out of the European wars
       6. The Mexican entanglement (478-479).
       7. The World War (596-620).
     V. Relations with Germany.
       1. Negotiations with Frederick, king of Prussia (128).
       2. The Samoan controversy (481-482).
       5. The World War (596-620).
     VI. Relations with the Orient.
       1. Early trading connections (486-487).
       4. The Boxer rebellion and the "open door" policy (499-502).
       5. Roosevelt and the close of the Russo-Japanese War (511).
       6. The Oriental immigration question (583-584).
     VII. The United States and Latin America.
       1. Mexican relations.
         _b._ Mexico and French intervention--policy of the United
         _c._ The overthrow of Diaz (1911) and recent questions
         _a._ Slavery and the "Ostend Manifesto" (485-486).
         _b._ The revolutionary period, 1867-1877 (487).
         _c._ The revival of revolution (487-491).
         _d._ American intervention and the Spanish War (491-496).
         _e._ The Platt amendment and American protection (518-519).
         _a._ Acquisition of Porto Rico (493).
         _b._ The acquisition of the Panama Canal strip (508-510).
         _c._ Purchase of Danish West Indies (593).
         _e._ Extension of protectorate over Haiti, Santo Domingo,
              and Nicaragua (513-514, 592-594).
Adams, John, 97, 128, 179ff.
Aguinaldo, 497
Alabama, admission, 227
Alamance, battle, 92
Alamo, 280
Alaska, purchase, 479
Albany, plan of union, 62
Algonquins, 57
Alien law, 180
Amendments to federal Constitution: first eleven, 163
  thirteenth, 358
  fifteenth, 358
  sixteenth, 528
American expeditionary force, 610
Americanization, 585
Amnesty, for Confederates, 383
Andros, 65
Anti-Federalists, 169
Anti-slavery. _See_ Abolition
Anthony, Susan, 564
Appomattox, 363
Arkansas, admission, 272
Articles of Confederation, 110, 139ff., 146
Assumption, 164ff.
Australian ballot, 540
Baltimore, Lord, 6
Bank: first U.S., 167
  second, 203, 257ff.
  services of, 407
Bastille, 172
Bell, John, 341
Belleau Wood, 611
Berlin decree, 194
Blockade: by England and France, 193ff.
  Southern ports, 353
  law and practice in 1914, 598ff.
Bond servants, 13ff.
Boone, Daniel, 28, 218
  evacuation, 116
Bowdoin, Governor, 142
Boxer rebellion, 499
Breckinridge, J.C., 340
Bright, John, 355
Brown, John, 338
Brown University, 45
Bryan, W.J., 468ff., 495, 502, 503, 527
Buchanan, James, 335, 368
Bull Run, 350
Burke, Edmund, 87, 96ff., 132, 175
Burr, Aaron, 183, 231
California, 286ff.
Canada, 61, 114, 530
Canning, British premier, 206
Cantigny, 611
Caribbean, 479
Carpet baggers, 373
Caucus, 245
Censorship. _See_ Newspapers
Charleston, 36, 116
Charters, colonial, 2ff., 41
Chase, Justice, 187
Checks and balances, 153
Child labor law, 591
China, 447, 499ff.
Chinese labor, 583
Churches, colonial, 39ff., 42, 43
Cities, 35, 36, 300ff., 395, 410, 544
City manager plan, 545
Civil liberty, 358ff., 561
Clark, G.R., 116, 218
Cleveland, Grover, 421, 465, 482, 484, 489, 582
Colorado, admission, 441
Combination. _See_ Trusts
  disorders after 1781, 140
  domestic growth of, 307
  congressional regulation of, 460ff., 547
  _See also_ Trusts and Railways
Communism, colonial, 20f.
Company, trading, 2f.
  of 1850, 328ff.
Conciliation, with England, 131
Confederation: New England, 61f.
Congregation, religious, 4
Congress:  stamp act, 85
  under Articles, 139f.
  under Constitution, 152
Connecticut: founded, 4ff.
Conservation, 523ff.
Constitution: formation of, 143ff.
  _See also_ Amendment
Contract labor law, 584
Convention: 1787, 144ff.
Convicts, colonial, 15
Conway Cabal, 120
Corporation and labor, 571. _See also_ Trusts
Cox, J.M., 619
_Crisis, The_, pamphlet, 115
Cumberland Gap, 223
Currency. _See_ Banking
Danish West Indies, purchased, 593
Davis, Jefferson, 346ff.
Debs, E.V., 465, 534
Debt, national, 164ff.
Defense, national, 154
Delaware, 3, 49
Dewey, Admiral, 492
Diplomacy: of the Revolution, 127ff.
  Civil War, 354
Domestic industry, 28
Donelson, Fort, 361
Draft: Civil War, 351
  World War, 605
Drug act, 523
Education, 43ff., 557, 591
Electors, popular election of, 245
Emancipation, 357ff.
Embargo acts, 186ff.
England: Colonial policy of, 64ff.
  Revolutionary War, 99ff.
  Jay treaty, 177
  Ashburton treaty, 265
  World War, 596ff.
Erie Canal, 233
Espionage act, 607
Expunging resolution, 260
Federal trade commission, 590
_Federalist_, the, 158
Federalists, 168ff., 201ff.
Filipino revolt. _See_ Philippines
Fillmore, President, 485
  disorders, 140
  Civil War, 347, 352ff.
  _See also_ Banking
Fishing industry, 31
Florida, 134, 204
Foch, General, 611
Force bills, 384 ff., 375
Forests, national, 525ff.
Fourteen points, 605
France: colonization, 59ff.
  French and Indian War, 60ff.
  French Revolution, 165ff.
  Quarrel with, 180
  Napoleonic wars, 193ff.
  World War, 596ff.
Franchises, utility, 548
Franklin, Benjamin, 45, 62, 82, 86, 128, 134
Freehold. _See_ Land
Free-soil party, 319
Friends, the, 5
Fugitive slave act, 329
Fulton, Robert, 231, 234
Fundamental orders, 5
Garfield, President, 416
Garrison, William Lloyd, 318
_Gaspee_, the, 92
Genet, 177
George I, 66
George II, 4, 66, 82
Georgia: founded, 4
  royal province, 49
  state constitution, 109
Germans: colonial immigration, 9ff.
  later immigration, 303
Germany: Samoa, 481
  World War, 596f.
Gibbon, Edward, 133
Gold: discovery, 288
Gompers, Samuel, 573, 608
Governor, royal, 49ff.
Grandfather clause, 386f.
Grangers, 460ff.
Greeley, Horace, 420
Greenbacks, 454ff.
Greenbackers, 462ff.
Greene, General, 117, 120
Guilford, battle, 117
Hamilton, Alexander, 95, 143, 158, 162, 168ff., 231
Harding, W.G., 389, 619
Harlem Heights, battle, 114
Harrison, Benjamin, 422, 484
Harrison, W.H., 198, 263f.
Hartford convention, 201ff., 238
Hawaii, 484f.
Hays, President, 416f.
Henry, Patrick, 85
Hepburn act, 523
Holland, 130
Holy Alliance, 205
Homestead act, 368, 432
Hooker, Thomas, 5
Hughes, Charles E., 602
Hume, David, 132
Illinois, admission, 226
Illiteracy, 585
Immigration: colonial, 1-17
  before Civil War, 302, 367
  after Civil War, 410ff.
  problems of, 582ff.
Imperialism, 494ff., 498f., 502ff.
Impressment of seamen, 194
Indentured servants, 13f.
Independence, Declaration of, 107
Indiana, admission, 226
Indians, 57ff., 81, 431
Industry: colonial, 28ff.
  during Civil War, 366
  after 1865, 390ff., 401ff., 436ff., 559
  _See also_ Trusts
Initiative, the, 543
Injunction, 465, 580
Internal improvements, 260, 368
Interstate commerce act, 461, 529
Invisible government, 537
Iowa, admission, 275
Irish, 11, 302
Jackson, Andrew, 201, 204, 246, 280
Jacobins, 174
James II, 65
Jamestown, 3, 21
Jay, John, 128, 158, 177
  political leader, 169
  as President, 183ff.
  Monroe Doctrine, 206, 231
Jews, migration of, 11
Johnson, Samuel, 132
Joliet, 59
Judiciary: British system, 67
  federal, 152
Kentucky: admission, 224
  Resolutions, 182
King George's War, 59
King's College (Columbia), 45
Knights of Labor, 575ff.
Kosciusko, 121
Ku Klux Klan, 382
Labor:  rise of organized, 304
  parties, 462ff.
  question, 521
  World War, 608ff.
Lafayette, 121
  federal sales policy, 220
  Western tenure, 228
  disappearance of free, 445
  new problems, 449
  _See also_ Homestead act
League of Nations, 616ff.
Lee, General Charles, 131
Lexington, battle, 100
Liberal Republicans, 420
  Douglas debates, 336f.
  election, 341
  Civil War, 344ff.
  reconstruction, 371
Literacy test, 585
Locke, John, 95
Lords of trade, 67ff.
Louis XVI, 171ff.
  admission, 227
_Lusitania_, the, 601ff.
McKinley, William, 422, 467ff., 489ff.
Madison, James, 158, 197ff.
Manila Bay, battle, 492
Manufactures. _See_ Industry
Marquette, 59
Marshall, John, 208ff.
Martineau, Harriet, 267
Maryland, founded, 6, 49, 109, 239, 242
  _See also_ Immigration, Royal province, Industry, Revolutionary War,
Massachusetts Bay Company, 3
  founded, 3ff.
  _See also_ Immigration, Royal province
_Mayflower_ compact, 4
Merchants. _See_ Commerce
_Merrimac_, the, 353
Meuse-Argonne, battle, 612
Milan Decree, 194
Militia, Revolutionary War, 122
Minnesota, admission, 275
Missouri Compromise, 207, 227, 271, 325, 332
Molasses act, 71
Money, paper, 80, 126, 155, 369
_Monitor_, the, 353
Monroe Doctrine, 205, 512
Montana, admission, 442
Morris, Robert, 127
Mothers' pensions, 551
Muckraking, 536f.
Municipal ownership, 549
Napoleon I, 190
  Mexico, 477
National road, 232
Nationalism, colonial, 56ff.
Navy: in Revolution, 188
  War of 1812, 195
  Civil War, 353
  World War, 610.
  _See also_ Sea Power
Nebraska, admission, 441
Negro: Civil rights, 370ff.
  status of, 396ff.
  _See also_ Slavery
New England: colonial times, 6ff., 35, 40ff.
  _See also_ Industry, Suffrage, Commerce, and Wars
  _See also_ Immigration, Royal province, Suffrage, and Constitutions,
    state
New Jersey, founded, 6.
   _See also_ Immigration, Royal province, Suffrage, and
     Constitutions, state
Newlands, Senator, 524
New Mexico, admission, 443
  battle, 201
Newspapers, colonial, 46ff.
  transferred to English, 49
  _See also_ Dutch, Immigration, Royal province, Commerce, Suffrage,
    and Constitutions, state
Niagara, Fort, 59
Nicaragua protectorate, 594
Non-intercourse act, 196ff.
North Carolina: founded, 6.
  _See also_ Royal province, Immigration, Suffrage, and Constitutions,
    state
North Dakota, admission, 442
Oglethorpe, James, 3
Oregon, 284ff.
Ostend Manifesto, 486
Otis, James, 88, 95f.
Pacific, American influence, 447
Paine, Thomas, 103, 115, 175
Panics: 1837, 262
  1857, 336
  1893, 465
Parcel post, 529
Parker, A.B., 527
Parties: rise of, 168ff.
  Democrats, 260
  Republicans, 334ff.
  Liberal Republicans, 420
  Constitutional union, 340
  minor parties, 462ff.
Paterson, William, 196ff.
Pennsylvania: founded, 6
  _See also_ Penn, Germans, Immigration, Industry, Revolutionary War,
    Constitutions, state, Suffrage
Pennsylvania University, 45
Pensions, soldiers and sailors, 413, 607
  mothers', 551
Philadelphia, 36, 116
Pierce, Franklin, 295, 330
Pinckney, Charles, 148
Pitt, William, 61, 79, 87, 132
Planting system, 22f., 25, 149, 389, 393ff.
Plymouth, 4, 21
Polygamy, 290f.
Populist party, 464
Porto Rico, 515, 592
Preble, Commodore, 196
Press. _See_ Newspapers
  University, 45
Prohibition, 591f.
Provinces, royal, 49ff.
Pullman strike, 465
Pure food act, 523
Quartering act, 83
Quebec act, 94
Queen Anne's War, 59
Quit rents, 21f.
Radicals, 579
Railways,  298, 402, 425, 460ff., 547, 621
Randolph, Edmund, 146, 147, 162
Ratification, of Constitution, 156ff.
Recall, 543
Reclamation, 523ff.
Referendum, the, 543
Republicans: Jeffersonian, 179
  supremacy of, 412ff.
Resumption, 454
Revolution: American, 99ff.
  French, 171ff.
  self-government, 49
Roosevelt, Theodore, 492, 500ff., 531, 570
Royal province, 49ff.
Saint Mihiel, 612
Samoa, 481
Santa Fe trail, 287
Saratoga, battle, 116, 130
Scandinavians, 278
Schools. _See_ Education
Scott, General, 283, 330
Sea power: American Revolution, 118
  Civil War, 353
  Caribbean, 593
  Pacific, 447
Seven Years' War, 60ff.
Seward, W.H., 322, 342
Shafter, General, 492
Shays's rebellion, 142
Sherman, General, 361
Sherman: anti-trust law, 461
  silver act, 458
Shiloh, 361
Shipping. _See_ Commerce
Shipping act, 607
Silver, free, 455ff.
Slavery: colonial, 16f.
  growth in South, 320ff.
  compromises, 350
Smith, Joseph, 290
Solomon, Hayn, 126
Sons of liberty, 82
South: economic and political views, 309ff.
South Carolina: founded, 6
  nullification, 253ff.
South Dakota, 442
  Spanish War, 490ff.
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 564
States: disorders under Articles of Confederation, 141
  position after Civil War, 366ff.
Strikes: of 1877, 581
  coal, 526
  _See also_ Labor
Submarine campaign, 600ff.
  first state constitutions, 239
  Negro, 374ff., 385f.
Sumner, Charles, 319
Sumter, Fort, 350
Swedes, 3, 13
Taney, Chief Justice, 357
Tariff: first, 167
  development of, 251ff.
  nullification, 251
  of 1857, 337
  Civil War, 367
  McKinley bill, 422
  Underwood, 588
Taxation: and representation, 149
  and World War, 606
Tea act, 88
Tea party, 92
Tennessee, 28, 224
Territories, Northwest, 219
  South of the Ohio, 219
  _See also_ Slavery and Compromise
Texas, 278ff.
Tippecanoe, battle, 198
Toleration, religious, 42
  in Revolution, 112
Townshend acts, 80, 87
Trade, colonial, 70
Transylvania company, 28
Treaties, of 1763, 61
  alliance with France, 177
  Jay, 177, 218
  Ashburton, 265
  Washington with England, 481
  with Spain, 492
  Versailles (1919), 612ff.
Trollope, Mrs., 268
Tweed, W.M., 418
Union party, 365
Unions. _See_ Labor
Utah, 290ff., 329, 442
Utilities, municipal, 548
Vallandigham, 360
Valley Forge, 116, 129
Van Buren, Martin, 262
Venango, Fort, 59
Washington: warns French, 60
  in French war, 63
  commander-in-chief, 101ff.
  and movement for Constitution, 142ff.
  as President, 166ff.
  Farewell Address, 178
Washington City, 166
Washington State, 442
Welfare work, 573
Whigs: English, 78
  colonial, 83
  rise of party, 260ff., 334, 340
White Camelia, 382
Wilmot Proviso, 326
Wilson, James, 147
Wilson, Woodrow, election, 533f.
Witchcraft, 41
Women: colonial, 28
  labor, 305
  education and civil rights, 554ff.
Workmen's compensation, 549
Writs of assistance, 88
Wyoming, admission, 442
Yale, 44
Young, Brigham, 290
Zenger, Peter, 48
       *       *       *       *       *
Punctuation normalized in all _Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._
Superscripted letters are denoted with a caret. For example, G^O
WASHINGTON.
Period added after Mass on verso page. Original read "Mass, U.S.A."
Chapter IV, page 61 cooperation changed to cooperation twice to match
rest of text usage. Also on page 620.
Chapter VIII, page 185, period added to "Vol." Original read "Vol III,"
Chapter X, page 219, changed coordinate to coordinate to reflect rest of
text usage.
Chapter X, page 234, Italicized habeus corpus to match rest of text.
Chapter XI, page 257 changed reestablished to reestablished to conform
Chapter XI, page 259 changed reelection to reelection
Chapter XII, page 269 added period after "Vol" Vol. II
Chapter XII, page 270. Title of work reads "_Selected Documents of
United States History, 1776-1761_". Research shows the document does
have this title.
Chapter XV, page 351. changed "bout" to "about". "for only about"
Chapter XVI, page 385. changed "provisons" to "provisions".
Chapter XX, page 478. changed "aniversary" to "anniversary".
one of whom,"
Topical Syllabus. Missing periods added to normalize punctuation in
entries such as on page 648 (4) Sixteenth Amendment--income tax
(528-529).
Appendix, page 631, comma changed to semi-colon on "bills of credit;" to
match rest of list. Also on "obligation of contracts;"
Index, page 657, changed "Freesoil" to Free-soil to match rest of text
usage.
Index, Page 662, added comma to States: disorders under Articles of
Constitution, 141]
Produced by Curtis Weyant, M and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
DAMAGE.
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
people in all walks of life.
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
works.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
     http://www.gutenberg.net
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Project Gutenberg's Manual of Surgery, by Alexis Thomson and Alexander Miles
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
       Volume First: General Surgery. Sixth Edition.
Author: Alexis Thomson and Alexander Miles
Release Date: March 4, 2006 [EBook #17921]
Language: English
Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANUAL OF SURGERY ***
Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Laura Wisewell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Transcriber's note: The original text used the apothecaries'       |
| symbols here rendered as [ounce] and [dram]. The substitutions     |
| standard. All the special characters are preserved in the UTF-8    |
| In addition, a number of printing errors have been corrected.      |
| These are marked in the HTML version only.                         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
                          MANUAL OF SURGERY
                     ALEXANDER MILES, F.R.C.S.Ed.
                           GENERAL SURGERY
                 HENRY FROWDE and HODDER & STOUGHTON
    First Edition                                             1904
    Second Edition                                            1907
    Third Edition                                             1909
    Fourth Edition                                            1911
      "       "    Second Impression                          1913
      "       "    Second Impression                          1919
                     PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
to be unlearned, and others have but little bearing on the problems
presented to the civilian surgeon. Save in its broadest principles, the
life, and the exhaustive literature now available on every aspect of it
makes it unnecessary that it should receive detailed consideration in a
resources as our experience leads us to believe will prove of permanent
value in civil practice.
For the rest, the text has been revised, condensed, and in places
rearranged; a number of old illustrations have been discarded, and a
have been omitted from the _Manual_, as they are to be found in the
companion volume on _Operative Surgery_, the third edition of which
We have retained the Basle anatomical nomenclature, as extended
experience has confirmed our preference for it. For the convenience of
readers who still employ the old terms, these are given in brackets
after the new.
arrangement has enabled us to deal in a more consecutive manner than
hitherto with the surgery of the Extremities, including Fractures and
Dislocations.
School and to other friends for aiding us in providing new
illustrations, and for other valuable help, as well as to our publishers
for their generosity in the matter of illustrations.
CONTENTS
                                                                   PAGE
    REPAIR                                                            1
    CONDITIONS WHICH INTERFERE WITH REPAIR                           17
    CHAPTER III
    INFLAMMATION                                                     31
    CHAPTER V
    ULCERATION AND ULCERS                                            68
    GANGRENE                                                         86
    CHAPTER VIII
    TUBERCULOSIS                                                    133
    SYPHILIS                                                        146
    CHAPTER X
    TUMOURS                                                         181
    CHAPTER XI
    INJURIES                                                        218
    CHAPTER XII
    CONSTITUTIONAL EFFECTS OF INJURIES                              249
    THE BLOOD VESSELS                                               258
    THE LYMPH VESSELS AND GLANDS                                    321
    THE NERVES                                                      342
    SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUES                                   376
    CHAPTER XVIII
    THE MUSCLES, TENDONS, AND TENDON SHEATHS                        405
    CHAPTER XIX
    THE BURSAE                                                       426
    CHAPTER XXI
    DISEASES OF JOINTS                                              501
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
  FIG.                                                             PAGE
    3. Streptococci in Pus from case of Diffuse Cellulitis           26
    4. Bacillus coli communis in Pus from Abdominal Abscess          27
    5. Fraenkel's Pneumococci in Pus from Empyema following          28
       Pneumonia
    6. Passive Hyperaemia of Hand and Forearm induced by Bier's       37
    7. Passive Hyperaemia of Finger induced by Klapp's Suction        38
       Bell
       Inflammation of Inguinal Gland
   10. Charts of Acute Sapraemia                                      61
   11. Chart of Hectic Fever                                         62
   12. Chart of Septicaemia followed by Pyaemia                        63
   13. Chart of Pyaemia following on Acute Osteomyelitis              65
   16. Bazin's Disease in a girl aet. 16                              75
   17. Syphilitic Ulcers in region of Knee                           76
   18. Callous Ulcer showing thickened edges                         78
       Leg
   20. Senile Gangrene of the Foot                                   89
   25. Chart of Erysipelas occurring in a wound                     108
   27. Bacillus of Anthrax                                          120
   29. Malignant Pustule fourteen days after infection              122
   30. Colony of Actinomyces                                        126
   31. Actinomycosis of Maxilla                                     128
   32. Mycetoma, or Madura Foot                                     130
   33. Tubercle bacilli                                             134
   34. Tuberculous Abscess in Lumbar Region                         141
   35. Tuberculous Sinus injected through its opening in the        144
   36. Spirochaete pallida                                           147
   37. Spirochaeta refrigerans from scraping of Vagina               148
   39. Syphilitic Rupia                                             159
   40. Ulcerating Gumma of Lips                                     169
   41. Ulceration in inherited Syphilis                             170
   42. Tertiary Syphilitic Ulceration in region of Knee and on      171
       both Thumbs
   44. Facies of Inherited Syphilis                                 175
   45. Subcutaneous Lipoma                                          185
   46. Pedunculated Lipoma of Buttock                               186
   47. Diffuse Lipomatosis of Neck                                  187
   48. Zanthoma of Hands                                            188
   49. Zanthoma of Buttock                                          189
   51. Chondroma of Metacarpal Bone of Thumb                        190
   52. Cancellous Osteoma of Lower End of Femur                     192
   54. Fibro-myoma of Uterus                                        196
   56. Sarcoma of Arm fungating                                     199
   57. Carcinoma of Breast                                          206
   58. Epithelioma of Lip                                           209
   59. Dermoid Cyst of Ovary                                        213
   60. Carpal Ganglion in a woman aet. 25                            215
   61. Ganglion on lateral aspect of Knee                           216
   63. Cicatricial Contraction following Severe Burn                236
   65. Radiogram showing calcareous degeneration of Arteries        284
   66. Varicose Vein with Thrombosis                                289
   70. Cirsoid Aneurysm of Orbit and Face                           300
   71. Radiogram of Aneurysm of Aorta                               303
   72. Sacculated Aneurysm of Abdominal Aorta                       304
       Moore-Corradi method
   74. Thoracic Aneurysm threatening to rupture                     313
   76. Congenital Cystic Tumour or Hygroma of Axilla                328
   77. Tuberculous Cervical Gland with Abscess formation            331
   79. Tuberculous Axillary Glands                                  335
   80. Chronic Hodgkin's Disease in boy aet. 11                      337
   81. Lymphadenoma in a woman aet. 44                               338
   82. Lympho Sarcoma removed from Groin                            339
   83. Cancerous Glands in Neck, secondary to Epithelioma of Lip    341
   85. Stump Neuromas, showing changes at ends of divided Nerves    354
   88. Multiple Neuro-Fibromas of Skin (Molluscum fibrosum)         358
   89. Elephantiasis Neuromatosa in a woman aet. 28                  359
   91. To illustrate the Loss of Sensation produced by Division     367
       Division of Ulnar Nerve
   93. Callosities and Corns on Sole of Foot                        377
   94. Ulcerated Chilblains on Fingers                              378
   95. Carbuncle on Back of Neck                                    381
   96. Tuberculous Elephantiasis                                    383
   97. Elephantiasis in a woman aet. 45                              387
  100. Sebaceous Horn growing from Auricle                          392
  101. Paraffin Epithelioma                                         394
  104. Diffuse Melanotic Cancer of Lymphatics of Skin               398
       Glands
  106. Recurrent Keloid                                             401
  107. Subungual Exostosis                                          403
  108. Avulsion of Tendon                                           410
  109. Volkmann's Ischaemic Contracture                              414
  110. Ossification in Tendon of Ilio-psoas Muscle                  417
  111. Radiogram of Calcification and Ossification in Biceps and    418
       Triceps
  112. Ossification in Muscles of Trunk in generalised Ossifying    419
  114. Section through Gouty Bursa                                  428
  115. Tuberculous Disease of Sub-Deltoid Bursa                     429
  116. Great Enlargement of the Ischial Bursa                       431
  117. Gouty Disease of Bursae                                       432
  119. Femur and Tibia showing results of Acute Osteomyelitis       445
  120. Segment of Tibia resected for Brodie's Abscess               449
  121. Radiogram of Brodie's Abscess in Lower End of Tibia          451
  123. New Periosteal Bone on Surface of Femur from Amputation      454
       Stump
  124. Tuberculous Osteomyelitis of Os Magnum                       456
  125. Tuberculous Disease of Tibia                                 457
  127. Advanced Tuberculous Disease in Region of Ankle              459
  128. Tuberculous Dactylitis                                       460
  129. Shortening of Middle Finger of Adult, the result of          461
  131. Syphilitic Hyperostosis and Sclerosis of Tibia               464
  132. Sabre-blade Deformity of Tibia                               467
  135. Cadaver, illustrating the alterations in the Lower Limbs     475
       resulting from Ostitis Deformans
  136. Osteomyelitis Fibrosa affecting Femora                       476
  137. Radiogram of Upper End of Femur in Osteomyelitis Fibrosa     478
  139. Multiple Exostoses of Limbs                                  483
  141. Multiple Cartilaginous Exostoses                             486
  143. Skiagram of Multiple Chondromas                              489
  144. Multiple Chondromas in Hand                                  490
  148. Chondro-Sarcoma of Scapula                                   494
  149. Central Sarcoma of Femur invading Knee Joint                 495
  153. Epitheliomatus Ulcer of Leg invading Tibia                   499
  155. Osseous Ankylosis of Knee                                    504
  157. Arthritis Deformans of Elbow                                 525
  158. Arthritis Deformans of Knee                                  526
  159. Hypertrophied Fringes of Synovial Membrane of Knee           527
  162. Bones of Knee in Charcot's Disease                           533
  163. Charcot's Disease of Left Knee                               534
  165. Charcot's Disease of both Ankles: back view                  536
  166. Radiogram of Multiple Loose Bodies in Knee-joint             540
  169. Multiple Cartilaginous Loose Bodies from Knee-joint          543
MANUAL OF SURGERY
    tissue--Cicatricial tissue--Modifications of process of
    repair--Repair in individual tissues--Transplantation or grafting
    of tissues--Conditions--Sources of grafts--Grafting of individual
    tissues--Methods.
INTRODUCTION
To prolong human life and to alleviate suffering are the ultimate
art--Medicine and Surgery--are so intimately related that it is
impossible to draw a hard-and-fast line between them, but for
convenience Surgery may be defined as "the art of treating lesions and
immediate." To apply his art intelligently and successfully, it is
essential that the surgeon should be conversant not only with the normal
anatomy and physiology of the body and with the various pathological
conditions to which it is liable, but also with the nature of the
process by which repair of injured or diseased tissues is effected.
the normal as result from mal-development, injury, or disease, or
these.
PROCESS OF REPAIR
possessed by vital cells of reacting to the irritation caused by injury
this irritation, undergo certain proliferative changes, which are
designed to restore the normal structure and configuration of the part.
The process by which this restoration is effected is essentially the
same in all tissues, but the extent to which different tissues can carry
perfect restitution to the normal. More complex structures, on the other
hand, such as secreting glands, muscle, and the tissues of the central
nervous system, are but imperfectly restored, simple cicatricial
Any given tissue can be replaced only by tissue of a similar kind, and
normal according to the recuperative capacity of the particular tissue.
The normal process of repair may be interfered with by various
extraneous agencies, the most important of which are infection by
disease-producing micro-organisms, the presence of foreign substances,
object of the surgeon is to promote the natural reparative process by
of the integument, which is uncomplicated by loss of tissue, by the
micro-organisms, and its edges are in contact. Such a wound in virtue of
the absence of infection is said to be _aseptic_, and under these
conditions healing takes place by what is called "primary union"--the
"healing by first intention" of the older writers.
#Granulation Tissue.#--The essential and invariable medium of repair in
tissue_, which is produced in the damaged area in response to the
such irritation results in dilatation of the vessels of the part,
emigration of leucocytes, transudation of lymph, and certain
proliferative changes in the fixed tissue cells. These changes are
common to the processes of inflammation and repair; no hard-and-fast
integument under aseptic conditions, the passage of the knife through
forms, and extends as far as the nearest collateral branch; and on the
surface of the wound there is a microscopic layer of bruised and
edges is occupied by blood-clot, which consists of red and white
them lymph exudes and leucocytes migrate into the tissues. In from
the wound begin to throw out minute buds and fine processes, which
between the two sides. Each bud begins in the wall of the capillary as a
into a filament containing a nucleus. This filament either joins with a
become hollow and are filled with blood from the vessels that gave them
origin. In this way a series of young _capillary loops_ is formed.
most important being the _fibroblasts_, which are destined to form
cicatricial fibrous tissue. These fibroblasts are large irregular
nucleated cells derived mainly from the proliferation of the fixed
connective-tissue cells of the part, and to a less extent from the
lymphocytes and other mononuclear cells which have migrated from the
vessels. Among the fibroblasts, larger multi-nucleated cells--_giant
cells_--are sometimes found, particularly when resistant substances,
such as silk ligatures or fragments of bone, are embedded in the
being to remove the red corpuscles and fibrin of the original clot, and
this performed, they either pass back into the circulation in virtue of
fibroblasts. Beyond this phagocytic action, they do not appear to play
any direct part in the reparative process. These young capillary loops,
_Formation of Cicatricial Tissue._--The transformation of this temporary
them a fine fibrillated material which gradually increases in quantity
till it replaces the cell protoplasm. In this way white fibrous tissue
is formed, the cells of which are arranged in parallel lines and
eventually become grouped in bundles, constituting fully formed white
fibrous tissue. In its growth it gradually obliterates the capillaries,
until at the end of two, three, or four weeks both vessels and cells
contraction_.
_Healing of Epidermis._--While these changes are taking place in the
_epidermis_ growing in from the margins. Within twelve hours the cells
surface of the wound, and by their proliferation gradually cover the
thickness it assumes a bluish hue and eventually the cells become
cornified and the epithelium assumes a greyish-white colour.
_Clinical Aspects._--So long as the process of repair is not complicated
by infection with micro-organisms, there is no interference with the
circulatory, gastro-intestinal, nervous, and other functions are
undisturbed; locally, the part is cool, of natural colour and free from
pain.
reparative processes, such modifications as are met with depending
merely upon incidental differences in the conditions present, such as
_Repair after Loss or Destruction of Tissue._--When the edges of a wound
cannot be approximated either because tissue has been lost, for example
The raw surface is first covered by a layer of coagulated blood and
fibrin. An extensive new formation of capillary loops and fibroblasts
filled by a fine velvet-like mass of granulation tissue. This
granulation tissue is gradually replaced by young cicatricial tissue,
clinically in a recent wound which has been packed with gauze. When the
papillary granulations, which are beginning to fill up the cavity. At
formed granulation tissue. As lymph and leucocytes escape from the
found that the granulation tissue gradually increases in amount till the
gap is completely filled up, and that coincidently the epithelium
spreads in and covers over its surface. In course of time the epithelium
thickens, and as the granulation tissue is slowly replaced by young
of as "healing by granulation"--although, as we have seen, it is by
granulation that all repair takes place.
each has become covered with healthy granulations. The exudate on the
_Reunion of Parts entirely Separated from the Body._--Small portions of
replaced and fixed in position, occasionally adhere by primary union.
even a complete joint may be transplanted, and unite by primary union.
_Healing under a Scab._--When a small superficial wound is exposed to
hard crust or _scab_, which serves to protect the surface from external
this scab the formation of granulation tissue, its transformation into
until in the course of time the crust separates, leaving a scar.
_Healing by Blood-clot._--In subcutaneous wounds, for example tenotomy,
operating upon bones, the space left between the divided tissues becomes
filled with blood-clot, which acts as a temporary scaffolding in which
granulation tissue is built up. Capillary loops grow into the coagulum,
and migrated leucocytes from the adjacent blood vessels destroy the red
corpuscles, and are in turn disposed of by the developing fibroblasts,
which by their growth and proliferation fill up the gap with young
_Presence of a Foreign Body._--When an aseptic foreign body is present
healing process may be modified. After primary union has taken place the
scar may broaden, become raised above the surface, and assume a
bluish-brown colour; the epidermis gradually thins and gives way,
appearance.
_Skin and Connective Tissue._--The mode of regeneration of these tissues
repair. In highly vascular parts, such as the face, the reparative
firmly united in from three to five days. Where the anastomosis is less
free the process is more prolonged. The more highly organised elements
of the skin, such as the hair follicles, the sweat and sebaceous glands,
hairless.
_Epithelium._--Epithelium is only reproduced from pre-existing
or islets, originating in surviving cells of sebaceous glands or sweat
area. Such islets may also be due to the accidental transference of
capable of starting epithelial growth on a granulating surface. Hairs
and nails may be completely regenerated if a sufficient amount of the
hair follicles or of the nail matrix has escaped destruction. The
epithelium of a mucous membrane is regenerated in the same way as that
on a cutaneous surface.
_Cartilage._--When an articular cartilage is divided by incision or by
is repaired by ordinary cicatricial fibrous tissue derived from the
proliferating cells of the perichondrium. Cartilage being a non-vascular
before it is complete.
It is possible for a metaplastic transformation of connective-tissue
cells into cartilage cells to take place, the characteristic hyaline
intermediary stage in the healing of fractures, especially in young
cartilage, provided the new tissue is so situated as to constitute part
of a joint and to be subjected to pressure by an opposing cartilaginous
so develop a new cartilage.
Conversely, it is observed that when articular cartilage is no longer
transformed into fibrous tissue, as may be seen in deformities attended
with displacement of articular surfaces, such as hallux valgus and
After fractures of costal cartilage or of the cartilages of the larynx
_Tendons._--When a tendon is divided, for example by subcutaneous
fibroblasts of which are derived from the sheath of the tendon, the
of the tendon itself. These fibroblasts ultimately develop into typical
fibres. Under aseptic conditions repair is complete in from two to three
may become adherent, which leads to impaired movement and stiffness. If
the ends of an accidentally divided tendon are at once brought into
accurate apposition and secured by sutures, they unite directly with a
minimum amount of scar tissue, and function is perfectly restored.
_Muscle._--Unstriped muscle does not seem to be capable of being
regenerated to any but a moderate degree. If the ends of a divided
striped muscle are at once brought into apposition by stitches, primary
nuclei of the muscle fibres in close proximity to this young cicatricial
tissue proliferate, and a few new muscle fibres may be developed, but
any gross loss of muscular tissue is replaced by a fibrous cicatrix. It
would appear that portions of muscle transplanted from animals to fill
up gaps in human muscle are similarly replaced by fibrous tissue. When a
muscle is paralysed from loss of its nerve supply and undergoes complete
degeneration, it is not capable of being regenerated, even should the
integrity of the nerve be restored, and so its function is permanently
lost.
incomplete, cicatricial tissue taking the place of the glandular
the gap is filled by fibrous tissue, but towards the periphery of the
reformed, no regeneration of secreting tissue takes place. After the
operation of decapsulation of the kidney a new capsule is formed, and
during the process young blood vessels permeate the superficial parts
of the kidney and temporarily increase its blood supply, but in the
obliterated. This does not prove that the operation is useless, as the
temporary improvement of the circulation in the kidney may serve to tide
rapidity. Within a few hours the peritoneal surfaces are glued together
by a thin layer of fibrin and leucocytes, which is speedily organised
muscular elements, which are not regenerated. The mucous lining is
_Nerve Tissues._--There is no trustworthy evidence that regeneration of
conveniently considered in the chapters dealing with these structures.
#Rate of Healing.#--While the rate at which wounds heal is remarkably
constant there are certain factors that influence it in one direction or
is in normal health and the vitality of the tissues has not been
old, although the difference is so small that it can only be
Wounds of certain parts of the body heal more quickly than others: those
of the scalp, face, and neck, for example, heal more quickly than those
over the buttock or sacrum, probably because of their greater
vascularity.
natural that a long and deep wound should take longer to heal than a
short and superficial one, because there is so much more work to be
done in the conversion of blood-clot into granulation tissue, and this
Conditions are not infrequently met with in which healing is promoted
and restoration of function made possible by the transference of a
portion of tissue from one part of the body to another; the tissue
transferred is known as the _graft_ or the _transplant_. The simplest
example of grafting is the transplantation of skin.
"taking," as it is called, the transplanted tissue must retain its
which it is placed, so that it may derive the necessary nourishment from
graft continue to proliferate, producing new tissue elements to replace
bleeds when cut into, and is permeated by new nerve fibres spreading in
from the periphery towards the centre.
grafting purposes; the higher tissues such as those of the central
nervous system and highly specialised glandular tissues like those of
fat, cartilage, and bone retain their vitality for several hours after
appendages.
_Sources of Grafts._--It is convenient to differentiate between
_homoplastic_ grafts, derived from another animal of the same species;
and _heteroplastic_ grafts, derived from an animal of another species.
Other conditions being equal, the prospects of success are greatest with
chemical irritation; it must be brought into accurate contact with the
excluded; it will be observed that these are exactly the same conditions
healing of grafts is exactly comparable.
that tissues might be taken from the operating theatre and kept in cold
storage until they were required. It is now agreed that tissues which
have been separated from the body for some time inevitably lose their
vitality, become incapable of regeneration, and are therefore unsuited
for grafting purposes. If it is intended to preserve a portion of tissue
for future grafting, it should be embedded in the subcutaneous tissue of
the abdominal wall until it is wanted; this has been carried out with
portions of costal cartilage and of bone.
INDIVIDUAL TISSUES AS GRAFTS
it has long been called, _transfusion_. Being always a homoplastic
transfer, the new blood is not always tolerated by the old, in which
case biochemical changes occur, resulting in haemolysis, which
grafts. (See article on Transfusion, _Op. Surg._, p. 37.)
other, as lesions causing defects of skin are extremely common and
without the aid of grafts are tedious in healing.
Skin grafts may be applied to a raw surface or to one that is covered
with granulations.
_Skin grafting of raw surfaces_ is commonly indicated after operations
for malignant disease in which considerable areas of skin must be
_Skin grafting of granulating surfaces_ is chiefly employed to promote
tissue makes itself manifest. Before applying the grafts it is usual to
is exposed, but, if the granulations are healthy and can be rendered
green protective is placed next the raw surface to prevent the gauze
adhering and starting the bleeding afresh when it is removed.
of the true skin--cutis-grafting.
_Epidermis or Epithelial Grafting._--The method introduced by the late
Professor Thiersch of Leipsic is that almost universally practised. It
consists in transplanting strips of epidermis shaved from the surface of
the skin, the razor passing through the tips of the papillae, which
appear as tiny red points yielding a moderate ooze of blood.
or upper arm, the skin in those regions being pliable and comparatively
free from hairs.
They are cut with a sharp hollow-ground razor or with Thiersch's
grafting knife, the blade of which is rinsed in alcohol and kept
moistened with warm saline solution. The cutting is made easier if the
skin is well stretched and kept flat and perfectly steady, the
operator's left hand exerting traction on the skin behind, the hands of
anaesthetic, or regional anaesthesia is obtained by injections of a
solution of one per cent. novocain into the line of the lateral and
middle cutaneous nerves; the disinfection of the skin is carried out on
by means of alcohol followed by saline solution.
complete carpet, slightly overlapping the edges of the area and of one
which are then subjected to firm pressure with a pad of gauze to express
blood and air-bells and to ensure accurate contact, for this must be as
grafts have been taken, gauze soaked in _liquid paraffin_--the patent
variety known as _ambrine_ is excellent--appears to be the best; the
gauze should be moistened every other day or so with fresh paraffin, so
another useful type of dressing; as is also _picric acid_ solution. Over
the gauze, there is applied a thick layer of cotton wool, and the whole
dressing is kept in place by a firmly applied bandage, and in the case
of the limbs some form of splint should be added to prevent movement.
A dressing may be dispensed with altogether, the grafts being protected
by a wire cage such as is used after vaccination, but they tend to dry
up and come to resemble a scab.
When the grafts have healed, it is well to protect them from injury and
to prevent them drying up and cracking by the liberal application of
lanoline or vaseline.
The new skin is at first insensitive and is fixed to the underlying
onwards) sensation returns and the formation of elastic tissue beneath
renders the skin pliant and movable so that it can be pinched up between
_Reverdin's_ method consists in planting out pieces of skin not bigger
associated with his name. They should be cut oval or spindle-shaped, to
facilitate the approximation of the edges of the resulting wound. The
graft should be cut to the exact size of the surface it is to cover;
Gillies believes that tension of the graft favours its taking. These
granulations. It is sometimes an advantage to stitch them in position,
especially on the face. The dressing and the after-treatment are the
same as in epidermis grafting.
There is a degree of uncertainty about the graft retaining its vitality
long enough to permit of its deriving the necessary nourishment from its
new surroundings; in a certain number of cases the flap dies and is
thrown off as a slough--moist or dry according to the presence or
The technique for cutis-grafting must be without a flaw, and the asepsis
there must be no traction on the flap that will endanger its blood
supply.
Owing to the uncertainty in the results of cutis-grafting the
until its blood supply from its new bed is assured; the detachment is
then made complete. The blood supply of the proposed flap may influence
cut from the side of the head to fill a defect in the cheek, having in
its margin of attachment or pedicle the superficial temporal artery, is
more likely to take than a flap cut with its base above.
ends like the piers of a bridge; this method is well suited to defects
and securely fixed in position; after an interval of 14 to 21 days, when
the flap is assured of its blood supply, the piers of the bridge are
divided (Fig. 1). With undermining it is usually easy to bring the
edges of the gap in the abdominal wall together, even in children; the
prominent--almost like the pad of a boxing-glove--for some time, but
the restoration of function in the capacity to flex the fingers is
[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Ulcer of back of Hand covered by flap of skin
still further by transferring the flap of skin first to one part of the
Gillies has especially developed this method in the remedying of
deformities of the face caused by gunshot wounds and by petrol burns in
to be brought together so as to form a tube of skin: after the
circulation has been restored, the lower end of the tube is detached and
is brought up to the lip or cheek, or eyelid, where it is wanted; when
this end has derived its new blood supply, the other end is detached
from the neck and brought up to where it is wanted. In this way, skin
and conjunctiva. The technique is similar to that employed in
skin-grafting; the sources of mucous membrane are limited and the
element of septic infection cannot always be excluded.
_Fat._--Adipose tissue has a low vitality, but it is easily retained and
it readily lends itself to transplantation. Portions of fat are often
obtainable at operations--from the omentum, for example, otherwise the
subcutaneous fat of the buttock is the most accessible; it may be
and sounder healing and also to remedy deformity, as in filling up a
The _fascia lata of the thigh_ is widely and successfully used as a
graft to fill defects in the dura mater, and interposed between the
readily lends itself to transplantation.
_Cartilage and bone_, next to skin, are the tissues most frequently
employed for grafting purposes; their sphere of action is so extensive
with the methods of re-forming the nose.
_Muscle and nerve_, on the other hand, do not retain their vitality when
for their connective-tissue elements, which it goes without saying are
more readily obtainable from other sources.
is vascularised and has been shown to functionate, but there is not
the secreting tissue is gradually replaced by connective tissue and the
CHAPTER II
SURGICAL BACTERIOLOGY
Want of rest--Irritation--Unhealthy tissues--Pathogenic bacteria.
    SURGICAL BACTERIOLOGY--General characters of
    bacteria--Classification of bacteria--Conditions of bacterial
    growth--Death of bacteria--Immunity--Antitoxic sera--Identification
Of these, one of the most important is undue movement of the affected
rest as the chief of natural therapeutic agents was the theme of John
understood that "rest" implies more than the mere state of physical
prevented as far as is possible. For instance, the constituent bones of
a joint affected with tuberculosis must be controlled by splints or
the limb may not be used for any purpose; physiological rest may be
secured to an inflamed colon by making an artificial anus in the caecum;
quantity and quality of the fluids taken by the patient.
tends to delay the healing of open wounds. The existence of grave
Infection by disease-producing micro-organisms or _pathogenic bacteria_
is, however, the most potent factor in disturbing the natural process of
repair in wounds.
SURGICAL BACTERIOLOGY
role played by them in interfering with the natural process of repair,
are so important that the science of applied bacteriology has now come
to dominate every department of surgery, and it is from the standpoint
original meaning as synonymous with "putrefaction," but is employed to
denote all conditions in which bacterial infection has taken place, and
more particularly those in which pyogenic bacteria are present. In the
same way the term _aseptic_ conveys the idea of freedom from all forms
of bacteria, putrefactive or otherwise; and the term _antiseptic_ is
granular mass of protoplasm, enclosed in a thin gelatinous envelope.
Many forms are motile--some in virtue of fine thread-like flagella, and
multiply by simple fission, each parent cell giving rise to two daughter
cells, and this process goes on with extraordinary rapidity. Other
_spores_. A spore is a minute mass of protoplasm surrounded by a dense,
tough membrane, developed in the interior of the parent cell. Spores are
to the action of heat and chemical germicides.
Bacteria are most conveniently classified according to their shape. Thus
we recognise (1) those that are globular--_cocci_; (2) those that
resemble a rod--_bacilli_; (3) the spiral or wavy forms--_spirilla_.
diameter. The great majority are non-motile. They multiply by fission;
and when they divide in such a way that the resulting cells remain in
pairs, are called _diplococci_, of which the bacteria of gonorrhoea and
pneumonia are examples (Fig. 5). When they divide irregularly, and form
grape-like bunches, they are known as _staphylococci_, and to this
variety the commonest pyogenic or pus-forming organisms belong (Fig. 2).
When division takes place only in one axis, so that long chains are
met with in erysipelas and various other inflammatory and suppurative
they are broad (Fig. 4). Some multiply by fission, others by
sporulation. Some forms are motile, others are non-motile. Tuberculosis,
forms of bacilli.
_Spirilla_ are long, slender, thread-like cells, more or less spiral or
flagellae. The spirochaete associated with syphilis (Fig. 36) is the most
important member of this group.
#Conditions of Bacterial Life.#--Bacteria require for their growth and
carbohydrates, and salts of calcium and potassium which they break up
into simpler elements. An alkaline medium favours bacterial growth; and
moisture is a necessary condition; spores, however, can survive the want
necessity for oxygen varies in different species. Those that require
oxygen are known as _aerobic bacilli_ or _aerobes_; those that cannot
majority of bacteria, however, while they prefer to have oxygen, are
able to live without it, and are called _facultative anaerobes_.
The most suitable temperature for bacterial life is from 95 o to 102 o F.,
autoclave under a pressure of two atmospheres destroys even the most
resistant spores in a few minutes. Direct sunlight, electric light, or
even diffuse daylight, is inimical to the growth of bacteria, as are
also Rontgen rays and radium emanations.
pathogenic bacteria--that is, bacteria capable of producing disease in
certain features peculiar to the invading bacteria, and (2) others
peculiar to the host. Many bacteria have only the power of living upon
living tissue are, by distinction, known as _parasites_. The power a
and under varying circumstances. The actual number of organisms
introduced is also an important factor in determining their pathogenic
power. Healthy tissues can resist the invasion of a certain number of
bacteria of a given species, but when that number is exceeded, the
gain access directly to the blood-stream, as a rule they produce their
effects more certainly and with greater intensity than when they are
the patient into whose tissues it is introduced. So long as a person is
individual, however, either locally or generally, at once renders him
more susceptible to infection. Thus bruised or torn tissue is much more
liable to infection with pus-producing organisms than tissues clean-cut
with a knife; also, after certain diseases, the liability to infection
by the organisms of diphtheria, pneumonia, or erysipelas is much
increased. Even such slight depression of vitality as results from
the scale in the battle between the tissues and the bacteria. Age is an
There is evidence that a _mixed infection_--that is, the introduction of
more than one species of organism, for example, the tubercle bacillus
produced by the others so devitalise the tissue cells, and diminish
their power of resistance, that the virulence of the most active
that the products of certain organisms antagonise one another--for
example, an attack of erysipelas may effect the cure of a patch of
tuberculous lupus.
Lastly, in patients suffering from chronic wasting diseases, bacteria
may invade the internal organs by the blood-stream in enormous numbers
shortly precedes death. The discovery of such collections of organisms
on post-mortem examination may lead to erroneous conclusions being drawn
as to the cause of death.
#Results of Bacterial Growth.#--Some organisms, such as those of tetanus
tendency to pass far beyond the point at which they gain an entrance to
the body. Others, on the contrary--for example, the tubercle bacillus
and the organism of acute osteomyelitis--although frequently remaining
lodging in the capillaries of joints, bones, kidney, or lungs, and there
In the human subject, multiplication in the blood-stream does not occur
osteomyelitis, cellulitis, etc., pure cultures of staphylococci or of
It is by the vital changes they bring about in the parts where they
settle that micro-organisms disturb the health of the patient. In
derangements, interference with the gastro-intestinal functions and also
definite and distinct groups of symptoms--such as the convulsions of
the accumulation of the toxic products of bacterial action tends to
interfere with the continued life and growth of the organisms
brought about. Outside the body, bacteria may be killed by starvation,
perchloride and biniodide of mercury, and various chlorine preparations
are the most powerful.
#Immunity.#--Some persons are insusceptible to infection by certain
diseases, from which they are said to enjoy a _natural immunity_. In
least, from a second attack--_acquired immunity_.
possess of ingesting bacteria and of destroying them by a process of
intra-cellular digestion. To this process Metchnikoff gave the name of
and (2) the _macrophages_, which include the larger hyaline leucocytes,
endothelial cells, and connective-tissue corpuscles.
During the process of phagocytosis, the polymorpho-nuclear leucocytes in
the circulating blood increase greatly in numbers (_leucocytosis_), as
bacteria they produce certain ferments which enter the blood serum.
These are known as _opsonins_ or _alexins_, and they act on the bacteria
for the phagocytes.
_Artificial or Passive Immunity._--A form of immunity can be induced by
the introduction of protective substances obtained from an animal which
has been actively immunised. The process by which passive immunity is
acquired depends upon the fact that as a result of the reaction between
protect it against that disease. The most important of these antibodies
are the _antitoxins_. From the study of the processes by which immunity
is secured against the effects of bacterial action the serum and vaccine
methods of treating certain infective diseases have been evolved. The
of antibodies to neutralise the infection. The anti-diphtheritic and the
anti-tetanic act by neutralising the specific toxins of the
disease--_antitoxic serums_; the anti-streptcoccic and the serum for
A _polyvalent_ serum, that is, one derived from an animal which has been
used.
_Clinical Use of Serums._--Every precaution must be taken to prevent
organismal contamination of the serum or of the apparatus by means of
by boiling. The best situations for injection are under the skin of the
the seat of puncture. If the bulk of the full dose is large, it should
be divided and injected into different parts of the body, not more than
serum. The immunity produced by injections of antitoxic sera lasts only
for a comparatively short time, seldom longer than a few weeks.
_"Serum Disease" and Anaphylaxis._--It is to be borne in mind that some
injection being followed in a few days by the appearance of an
urticarial or erythematous rash, pain and swelling of the joints, and a
acting as antigens. When a second injection is given after an interval
of some days, if anaphylaxis has been established by the first dose, the
patient suddenly manifests toxic symptoms of the nature of profound
shock which may even prove fatal. The conditions which render a person
liable to develop anaphylaxis and the mechanism by which it is
consists in injecting, while the disease is still active, specially
to resist the attacks of the phagocytes. The method is most successful
a considerable time, laboratory-prepared polyvalent _stock vaccines_ may
the blood is used up in neutralising the substances injected, and this
may reduce the opsonic index to such an extent that the vaccines
can be determined from the general condition of the patient. The initial
diminution in the next dose. If, on the other hand, the local as well as
indicates a positive phase, and the original dose may be repeated or
being selected which is not liable to pressure, as there is sometimes
considerable local reaction. Repeated doses may be necessary at
tuberculous lesions, in pyogenic infections such as acne, boils,
bacteria.
PYOGENIC BACTERIA
From the point of view of the surgeon the most important varieties of
micro-organisms are those that cause inflammation and suppuration--the
_pyogenic bacteria_. This group includes a great many species, and these
are so widely distributed that they are to be met with under all
conditions of everyday life.
The nature of the inflammatory and suppurative processes will be
considered in detail later; suffice it here to say that they are brought
about by the action of one or other of the organisms that we have now to
It is found that the _staphylococci_, which cluster into groups, tend to
rise to diffuse, spreading conditions. Many varieties of pyogenic
bacteria have now been differentiated, the best known being the
communis.
Osteomyelitis. x 1000 diam. Gram's stain.]
_Staphylococcus Aureus._--This is the commonest organism found in
its virulence, and is found in such widely different conditions as skin
pustules, boils, carbuncles, and some acute inflammations of bone. As
individual cells taking place irregularly (Fig. 2). When grown in
exposure to high temperatures than most non-sporing bacteria. It is
capable of lying latent in the tissues for long periods, for example, in
fresh outbreak of suppuration. This organism is widely distributed: it
and as it is present in the dust of the air and on all objects upon
the same properties and characters, save that its growth on artificial
abscesses, the skin being its normal habitat.
_Streptococcus Pyogenes._--This organism also varies greatly in its
virulence; in some instances--for example in erysipelas--it causes a
sharp attack of acute spreading inflammation, which soon subsides
in their vicinity, and so interfering with the exudation of leucocytes
which would otherwise exercise their protective influence. Streptococci
invade the lymph spaces, and are associated with acute spreading
conditions such as phlegmonous or erysipelatous inflammations and
suppurations, lymphangitis and suppuration in lymph glands, and
inflammation of serous and synovial membranes, also with a form of
throat. Streptococci are also concerned in the production of spreading
gangrene and pyaemia.
Division takes place in one axis, so that chains of varying length are
formed (Fig. 3). It is less easily cultivated by artificial media than
the staphylococcus; it forms a whitish growth.
Cystitis. x 1000 diam. Leishman's stain.]
of the intestinal tract, shows a great tendency to invade any organ or
tissue whose vitality is lowered. It is causatively associated with such
conditions as peritonitis and peritoneal suppuration resulting from
strangulated hernia, appendicitis, or perforation in any part of the
alimentary canal. In cystitis, pyelitis, abscess of the kidney,
conditions, it plays a most important part. The discharge from wounds
motile (Fig. 4). It closely resembles the typhoid bacillus, but is
[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Fraenkel's Pneumococci in Pus from Empyema
_Pneumo-bacteria._--Two forms of organism associated with
pneumonia--_Fraenkel's pneumococcus_ (one of the diplococci) (Fig. 5)
and _Friedlander's pneumo-bacillus_ (a short rod-shaped form)--are
inflammatory and suppurative conditions.
organs, especially during convalescence from typhoid fever. Like the
staphylococcus, it is capable of lying latent in the tissues for long
_Other Pyogenic Bacteria._--It is not necessary to do more than name
some of the other organisms that are known to be pyogenic, such as the
bacillus pyocyaneus, which is found in green and blue pus, the
micrococcus tetragenus, the gonococcus, actinomyces, the glanders
bacillus, and the tubercle bacillus. Most of these will receive further
of leucocytes in the blood throughout the circulatory system. This
condition of the blood, which is known as _leucocytosis_, is believed to
be due to an excessive output and rapid formation of leucocytes by the
bone marrow, and it probably has as its object the arrest and
destruction of the invading organisms or toxins. To increase the
resisting power of the system to pathogenic organisms, an artificial
The _normal_ number of leucocytes per cubic millimetre varies in
above 12,000 is considered abnormal. When leucocytosis is present, the
upon as a high degree of leucocytosis. According to Ehrlich, the
of leucocytes in normal blood: polynuclear neutrophile leucocytes, 70 to
72 per cent.; lymphocytes, 22 to 25 per cent.; eosinophile cells, 2 to 4
differential count must be made to determine which variety of cells is
in excess. In the majority of surgical affections it is chiefly the
(_ordinary leucocytosis_). In some cases, and particularly in parasitic
diseases such as trichiniasis and hydatid disease, the eosinophile
leucocytes also show a proportionate increase (_eosinophilia_). The term
_lymphocytosis_ is applied when there is an increase in the number of
circulating lymphocytes, as occurs, for example, in lymphatic leucaemia,
and in certain cases of syphilis.
Leucocytosis is met with in nearly all acute infective diseases, and in
virulence of the toxins may prevent the leucocytes reacting, and
leucocytosis may be absent. The absence of leucocytosis in a disease in
which it is usually present is therefore to be looked upon as a grave
omen, particularly when the general symptoms are severe. In some cases
of malignant disease the number of leucocytes is increased to 15,000 or
infusion of fluids into the circulation. After all operations there is
at least a transient leucocytosis (_post-operative leucocytosis_)
(F. I. Dawson).
example, by shivering, rigor, or rise of temperature. The number of
leucocytes rises somewhat rapidly, increases while the condition is
progressing, and remains high during the febrile period, but there is no
constant correspondence between the number of leucocytes and the height
are accompanied by a fall in the number of leucocytes, while the
occurrence of suppuration is attended with a further increase in their
In interpreting the "blood count," it is to be kept in mind that a
_physiological leucocytosis_ occurs within three or four hours of taking
to the normal number. In this _digestion leucocytosis_ the increase is
chiefly in the polynuclear neutrophile leucocytes. Immediately before
and after delivery, particularly in primiparae, there is usually a
moderate degree of leucocytosis. If the labour is normal and the
_Absence of Leucocytosis--Leucopenia._--In certain infective diseases
low--3000 or 4000--and this condition is known as _leucopenia_. It
occurs in typhoid fever, especially in the later stages of the disease,
in tuberculous lesions unaccompanied by suppuration, in malaria, and in
any of these conditions is to be looked upon as an indication that a
mixed infection has taken place, and that some suppurative process is
present.
has already been referred to.
It will be evident that too much reliance must not be placed upon a
a series of observations should be made, the blood being examined about
four hours after meals, and about the same hour each day.
be further referred to.
supplemented by staining films of the blood with a watery solution of
iodine and potassium iodide. In all advancing purulent conditions, in
with ulceration, a certain number of the polynuclear leucocytes are
stained a brown or reddish-brown colour, due to the action of the iodine
is absent in serous effusions, in unmixed tuberculous infections, in
uncomplicated typhoid fever, and in the early stages of cancerous
growths.
CHAPTER III
INFLAMMATION
Definition--Nature of inflammation from surgical point of
    view--Sequence of changes in bacterial inflammation--Clinical
    aspects of inflammation--General principles of treatment--Chronic
    inflammation.
in the tissues in response to irritation. These changes represent the
The phenomena which characterise the inflammatory reaction can be
induced by any form of irritation--such, for example, as mechanical
similar in kind whatever the irritant may be. The extent to which the
the system as a whole, vary with different irritants and with the
chemical irritant, acting alone, induces a degree of reaction directly
proportionate to its physical properties, and so long as it does not
completely destroy the vitality of the part involved, the changes in the
tissues are chiefly directed towards repairing the damage done to the
part, and the inflammatory reaction is not only compatible with the
addition produce chemical poisons (toxins) which aggravate the
irritative effects. The resulting reaction is correspondingly
progressive, and has as its primary object the expulsion of the irritant
but if the bacteria gain the upper hand in the struggle, the
inflammatory reaction becomes more intense, certain of the tissue
elements succumb, and the process for the time being is a destructive
either by natural means or by the aid of the surgeon, that repair takes
place.
main object is to exclude or to eliminate the bacterial factor, and so
is protective, and just in proportion as we succeed in attaining this
object, do we favour the occurrence of ideal repair.
#Sequence of Changes in Bacterial Inflammation.#--As the form of
inflammation with which we are most concerned is that due to the action
presence of a bacterial irritant.
The introduction of a colony of micro-organisms is quickly followed by
connective-tissue cells in the tissues at the site of infection. The
various cells are attracted to the bacteria by a peculiar chemical or
probably caused by some substance produced by the micro-organisms.
Changes in the blood vessels then ensue, the arteries becoming dilated
than normal, and in course of time the current may cease (_stasis_), and
with these changes in the vessels, the leucocytes in the blood of the
adhere to the vessel wall, where they may accumulate in large numbers.
In course of time the leucocytes pass through the vessel
corpuscles_. These processes are accompanied by changes in the
endothelium of the vessel walls, which result in an increased formation
of lymph, which transudes into the meshes of the connective tissue
giving rise to an _inflammatory oedema_, or, if the inflammation is on a
according to the nature, virulence, and location of the organisms
synovitis; _sero-fibrinous_, as in certain varieties of peritonitis, the
fibrin tending to limit the spread of the inflammation by forming
adhesions; _croupous_, when it coagulates on a free surface and forms a
of lymph and the emigration of leucocytes. The lymph contains the
opsonins which act on the bacteria and render them less able to resist
the attack of the phagocytes, as well as the various protective
principal agents in the process of phagocytosis (p. 22), and together
irritant effects are overcome, the inflammation is arrested, and
_resolution_ is said to take place.
the condition to the normal, and _repair_ ensues after the manner
already described. In certain situations, notably in tendon sheaths, in
perfect, adhesions forming between the opposing surfaces.
If, however, the reaction induced by the infection is insufficient to
check the growth and spread of the organisms, or to inhibit their toxin
production, local necrosis of tissue may take place, either in the form
of suppuration or of gangrene, or the toxins absorbed into the
which it occurs, and of an effort on the part of these tissues to
the patient lies, not in the reactive changes that constitute the
by the toxins of the bacteria at work in the inflamed area.
and pain have been recognised as cardinal signs of inflammation, and to
symptoms depend upon the acuteness of the condition, the nature of the
causative organism and of the tissue attacked, the situation of the part
in relation to the surface, and other factors.
quantity of blood present in it, and the more superficial the affected
the hand. This clinical point is best tested by placing the palm of the
hand and fingers for a few seconds alternately over an uninflamed and an
inflamed part. The shade of colour varies with the stage of the
inflammation, being lighter and brighter in the early, hyperaemic stages,
thrombotic stage the part may assume a purplish hue.
The _swelling_ is partly due to the increased amount of blood in the
tissue--_inflammatory oedema_. The more open the structure of the tissue
degree of oedema that occurs in such parts as the scrotum or the eyelids.
is, pain elicited on pressure--is one of the most valuable diagnostic
inflammation is almost an axiom of surgery. Pain and tenderness are due
sensitive by the abnormal conditions of their blood supply. In
area supplied by branches from the same segment of the cord as that
For purposes of diagnosis, attention should be paid to the terms in
an inflammation of the skin is usually described as of a _burning_ or
_itching_ character; that of inflammation in dense tissues like
periosteum or bone, or in encapsuled organs, as _dull_, _boring_, or
_aching_. When inflammation is passing on to suppuration the pain
assumes a _throbbing_ character, and as the pus reaches the surface, or
"points," as it is called, sharp, _darting_, or _lancinating_ pains are
or a _tingling_ pain; while the implication of a serous membrane such as
character.
to a greater or less extent.
temperature; certain changes in the pulse rate and the respiration;
central nervous system. These are all due to the absorption of toxins
_Temperature._--A marked rise of temperature is one of the most constant
temperature chart forms a fairly reliable index of the state of the
patient. The toxins interfere with the nerve-centres in the medulla that
Clinically the temperature is estimated by means of a self-registering
thermometer placed, for from one to five minutes, in close contact with
the skin in the axilla, or in the mouth. Sometimes the thermometer is
inserted into the rectum, where, however, the temperature is normally
to hour even in health, reaching its maximum between four and eight in
the evening, when it may rise to 99 o F., and is at its lowest between
The temperature is more easily disturbed in children than in adults, and
causes; in the aged it is less liable to change, so that a rise to 103 o
or 104 o F. is to be looked upon as indicating a high state of fever.
A sudden rise of temperature is usually associated with a feeling of
the patient shivers violently, while the skin becomes cold, pale, and
shrivelled--_cutis anserina_. This is a nervous reaction due to a want
the body, and is known clinically as a _rigor_. When the temperature
raised, and by the time the chill has passed off its maximum has been
reached.
The _pulse_ is always increased in frequency, and usually varies
directly with the height of the temperature. _Respiration_ is more
active during the progress of an inflammation; and bronchial catarrh is
especially urea and uric acid, and in calcium salts, while sodium
of severe inflammation with high temperature. The significance of
general _leucocytosis_ has already been referred to.
#General Principles of Treatment.#--The capacity of the inflammatory
reaction for dealing with bacterial infections being limited, it often
becomes necessary for the surgeon to aid the natural defensive
processes, as well as to counteract the local and general effects of the
The ideal means of helping the tissues is by removing the focus of
infection, and when this can be done, as for example in a carbuncle or
the focus is not sufficiently limited to admit of this, the infected
tissue may be scraped away with the sharp spoon, or destroyed by
of the inflammatory exudate, in which they are washed out.
#Artificial Hyperaemia.#--When such direct means as the above are
impracticable, much can be done to aid the tissues in their struggle by
to ensure that a plentiful supply of fresh arterial blood reaches it.
their causing a dilatation of the vessels, and so inducing a hyperaemia
in the affected area. It has been shown experimentally that repeated,
short applications of moist heat (not exceeding 106 o F.) are more
efficacious than continuous application. It is now believed that the
applying a strong solution of iodine around the affected area is based
[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Passive Hyperaemia of Hand and Forearm induced by
Bier's Bandage.]
While these and similar methods have long been employed in the treatment
of inflammatory conditions, it is only within comparatively recent years
that their mode of action has been properly understood, and to August
scientific and rational basis. Recognising the "beneficent intention" of
which accompanies the hyperaemic stages of the process, Bier was led to
study the effects of increasing the hyperaemia by artificial means. As a
result of his observations, he has formulated a method of treatment
either by obstructing the venous return from the part (_passive
hyperaemia_).
_Bier's Constricting Bandage._--To induce a _passive hyperaemia_ in a
limb, an elastic bandage is applied some distance above the inflamed
area sufficiently tightly to obstruct the venous return from the distal
parts without arresting in any way the inflow of arterial blood (Fig. 6).
become swollen and oedematous, and assume a bluish-red hue, but they
retain their normal temperature, the pulse is unchanged, and there is no
pain. If the part becomes blue, cold, or painful, or if any existing
pain is increased, the band has been applied too tightly. The hyperaemia
is kept up from twenty to twenty-two hours out of the twenty-four, and
in the intervals the limb is elevated to get rid of the oedema and to
period during which the band is kept on each day is diminished; but the
treatment should be continued for some days after all signs of
inflammation have subsided.
Suction Bell.]
constricting band cannot be applied, as for example an acute mastitis, a
rendered hyperaemic by an appropriately shaped glass bell applied over it
(Figs. 7 and 8). The edge of the bell is smeared with vaseline, and the
corresponding interval between the applications. Each sitting lasts for
or twice a day according to circumstances. This apparatus acts in the
same way as the old-fashioned _dry cup_, and is more convenient and
equally efficacious.
[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Passive Hyperaemia induced by Klapp's Suction
Bell for Inflammation of Inguinal Gland.]
_Active hyperaemia_ is induced by the local application of heat,
the absorption of inflammatory products and in overcoming adhesions and
restricted to fluids, such as milk, beef-tea, meat juices or gruel, and
these may be rendered more easily assimilable by artificial digestion if
of infection, such as diphtheria, streptococcal septicaemia, and tetanus.
opsonic power of the blood. When such means are not available, the
circulating toxins may to some extent be diluted by giving plenty of
bland fluids by the mouth or normal salt solution by the rectum.
The elimination of the toxins is promoted by securing free action of the
magnesium in a small quantity of water, ensures a free evacuation of the
bowels. The kidneys are flushed by such diluent drinks as equal parts of
consists of a dram and a half of cream of tartar added to a pint of
boiling water and sweetened with sugar after cooling, are also useful
powder (10 grains) or liquor ammoniae acetatis in three-dram doses every
four hours.
Various drugs administered internally, such as quinine, salol,
salicylate of iron, and others, have a reputation, more or less
deserved, as internal antiseptics.
Weakness of the heart, as indicated by the condition of the pulse, is
treated by the use of such drugs as digitalis, strophanthus, or
strychnin, according to circumstances.
Vomiting, for example, can sometimes be checked by effervescing drinks,
coffee-grounds from admixture with altered blood--the so-called
post-operative haematemesis--the best means of arresting the vomiting is
by washing out the stomach. Thirst is relieved by rectal injections of
saline solution. The introduction of saline solution into the veins or
of circulating toxins.
In surgical inflammations, as a rule, nothing is gained by lowering the
temperature, unless at the same time the cause is removed. When severe
or prolonged pyrexia becomes a source of danger, the use of hot or cold
sponging, or even the cold bath, is preferable to the administration of
_Relief of Symptoms._--For the relief of _pain_, rest is essential. The
prevent movement, and steps must be taken to reduce its functional
activity as far as possible. Locally, warm and moist dressings, such as
a poultice or fomentation, may be used. To make a fomentation, a piece
of flannel or lint is wrung out of very hot water or antiseptic lotion
and applied under a sheet of mackintosh. Fomentations should be renewed
as often as they cool. An ordinary india-rubber bag filled with hot
water and fixed over the fomentation, by retaining the heat, obviates
the necessity of frequently changing the application. The addition of a
few drops of laudanum sprinkled on the flannel has a soothing effect.
Lead and opium lotion is a useful, soothing application employed as a
Dry cold obtained by means of icebags, or by Leiter's lead tubes through
which a continuous stream of ice-cold water is kept flowing, is
sometimes soothing to the patient, but when the vessels in the inflamed
part are greatly congested its use is attended with considerable risk,
diminishes the outflow of venous blood, and so may determine gangrene of
tissues already devitalised.
thin piece of lint or gauze is applied over the inflamed part and kept
up as follows: take of chloride of ammonium, half an ounce; rectified
endanger the vitality of the tissues by pressing on the blood vessels to
of the toxins. Under such conditions the tension should be relieved and
the exudate with its contained toxins removed by making an incision into
the inflamed tissues, and applying a suction bell. When the exudate has
collected in a synovial cavity, such as a joint or bursa, it may be
withdrawn by means of a trocar and cannula. There are other methods of
Before applying leeches the part must be thoroughly cleansed, and if
retained in position under an inverted wine-glass or wide test-tube till
furnish the necessary resistance. The use of styptics may be called for.
_Wet-cupping_ has almost entirely been superseded by the use of Klapp's
_General blood-letting_ consists in opening a superficial vein
(venesection) and allowing from eight to ten ounces of blood to flow
_Counter-irritants._--In deep-seated inflammations, counter-irritants
it is desired to produce a blister. Blistering may be produced by a
painted on the part with a brush. Several paintings are often required
considered in the sections devoted to regional surgery.
#Chronic Inflammation.#--A variety of types of chronic and subacute
inflammation are met with which, owing to ignorance of their causations,
granulation tissue is formed in which cellular changes are more in
evidence than changes in the blood vessels, and in which the subsequent
degeneration and necrosis of the granulation tissue results in the
Another group is that in which chronic inflammation is due to mild or
attenuated forms of pyogenic infection affecting especially the lymph
associated with various forms of irritation about the external genitals,
different types of _chronic lymphadenitis_ are met with; they do not
hyperplasia of the tissue elements which results in enlargement of the
Similar varieties of _osteomyelitis_ are met with that do not, like the
acute forms, go on to suppuration or to death of bone, but result in
interior, resulting in obliteration of the medullary canal.
A third group of chronic inflammations are those that begin as an acute
pyogenic inflammation, which, instead of resolving completely, persists
of a foreign body, a piece of glass or metal, or a piece of dead bone;
in these circumstances the inflammation persists in a chronic form,
attended with the formation of fibrous tissue, and, in the case of bone,
with the formation of new bone in excess. It will be evident that in
this group, chronic inflammation and repair are practically
interchangeable terms.
There are other groups of chronic inflammation, the origin of which
continues to be the subject of controversy. Reference is here made to
sheaths and of bursae--_chronic synovitis_, _teno-synovitis_ and
_arthritis_; of the blood vessels--chronic forms of _endarteritis_ and
_chronic prostatitis_, having analogies with the chronic interstitial
inflammations of internal organs like the kidney--_chronic interstitial
nephritis_; and in the breast and prostate, as in the kidney, the
resulting in the formation of cysts.
suggest analogies with new growths. The best known of these are the
systematic forms of fibromatosis met with in the central nervous system
coat of the stomach--_gastric fibromatosis_; and in the
colon--_intestinal fibromatosis_.
These conditions will be described with the tissues and organs in which
as to their causation, and beyond such obvious indications as to help
the tissues by removing a foreign body or a piece of dead bone, there
are employed--empirically--a number of procedures such as the induction
bacterial origin.
CHAPTER IV
Definition--Pus--_Varieties_--Acute circumscribed abscess--_Acute
    suppuration in a wound_--_Acute Suppuration in a mucous
    membrane_--Diffuse cellulitis and diffuse suppuration--
Suppuration, or the formation of pus, is one of the results of the
action of bacteria on the tissues. The invading organism is usually one
of the staphylococci, less frequently a streptococcus, and still less
frequently one of the other bacteria capable of producing pus, such as
the bacillus coli communis, the gonococcus, the pneumococcus, or the
So long as the tissues are in a healthy condition they are able to
withstand the attacks of moderate numbers of pyogenic bacteria of
ordinary virulence, but when devitalised by disease, by injury, or by
inflammation due to the action of other pathogenic organisms,
the healthy urinary tract without doing any damage, but if the pelvis of
the kidney, the ureter, or the bladder is the seat of stone, they give
the lumen of a tubular organ, such as the appendix or the Fallopian tube
is blocked also, the action of pyogenic organisms is favoured and
suppuration ensues.
alkaline reaction, with a specific gravity of about 1030, and it has a
peculiar mawkish odour. If allowed to stand in a test-tube it does not
coagulate, but separates into two layers: the upper, transparent,
straw-coloured fluid, the _liquor puris_ or pus serum, closely
resembling blood serum in its composition, but containing less protein
and more cholestrol; it also contains leucin, tyrosin, and certain
The layer at the bottom of the tube consists for the most part of
polymorph leucocytes, and proliferated connective tissue and endothelial
corpuscles, dead bacteria, fat cells and shreds of tissue, cholestrol
are seen to have a well-defined rounded outline, and to contain a finely
granular protoplasm and a multi-partite nucleus; if still warm, the
cells may exhibit amoeboid movement. In stained films the nuclei take the
stain well. In older pus cells the outline is irregular, the protoplasm
stain.
are vascular and bleed easily, it becomes sanious from admixture with
mixed with the pus, it contains granules of blood pigment and is said to
be "grumous." The _odour_ of pus varies with the different bacteria
producing it. Pus due to ordinary pyogenic cocci has a mawkish odour;
The _colour_ of pus also varies: when due to one or other of the
varieties of the bacillus pyocyaneus, it is usually of a blue or green
may be of a bright orange colour. In wounds inflicted with rough iron
colour.
localised _abscess_; or it may infiltrate the tissues over a wide
ACUTE CIRCUMSCRIBED ABSCESS
Any tissue of the body may be the seat of an acute abscess, and there
entered through a wound or abrasion of the surface, or along the ducts
of the skin; an abscess in the breast from organisms which have passed
along the milk ducts opening on the nipple, or along the lymphatics
which accompany these. An abscess in a lymph gland is usually due to
infection passing by way of the lymph channels from the area of skin or
mucous membrane drained by them. Abscesses in internal organs, such as
the kidney, liver, or brain, usually result from organisms carried in
the blood-stream from some focus of infection elsewhere in the body.
and dealt with. In suppuration in the Fallopian tube (pyosalpynx), for
example, the fact that the most common origin of the infection is in the
genital passage, leads to examination for vaginal discharge; and if none
or an infective sore throat.
The exact location of an abscess also may furnish a key to its source;
glands the infection has come through the afferent lymphatics; if in the
cellular tissue, it has spread from the neck or chest wall; if in the
#Formation of an Abscess.#--When pyogenic bacteria are introduced into
wandering cells soon accumulate round the focus of infection, and form a
and to restrict their field of action. Within the area thus
circumscribed the struggle between the bacteria and the phagocytes takes
number of the leucocytes succumb, and, becoming degenerated, set free
certain proteolytic enzymes or ferments. The toxins cause
coagulation-necrosis of the tissue cells with which they come in
contact, the ferments liquefy the exudate and other albuminous
If the bacteria gain the upper hand, this process of liquefaction which
the protective barrier of leucocytes is broken down, and the
forms a new barrier, and eventually the spread is arrested, and the
Owing to the swelling and condensation of the parts around, the pus thus
formed is under considerable pressure, and this causes it to burrow
along the lines of least resistance. In the case of a subcutaneous
abscess the pus usually works its way towards the surface, and "points,"
and thin, and eventually sloughs, allowing the pus to escape.
An abscess forming in the deeper planes is prevented from pointing
surface. Accordingly, many abscess cavities resulting from deep-seated
suppuration are of irregular shape, with pouches and loculi in various
and a process of repair sets in. The walls of the abscess fall in;
granulation tissue grows into the space and gradually fills it; and
later this is replaced by cicatricial tissue. As a result of the
If an abscess is prevented from healing--for example, by the presence of
a foreign body or a piece of necrosed bone--a sinus results, and from it
pus escapes until the foreign body is removed.
#Clinical Features of an Acute Circumscribed Abscess.#--In the initial
elevation of temperature, with or without a rigor, progressive
leucocytosis, and sweating, mark the transition between inflammation and
process is spreading.
The local symptoms vary with the seat of the abscess. When it is
situated superficially--for example, in the breast tissue--the affected
area is hot, the redness of inflammation gives place to a dusky purple
colour, with a pale, sometimes yellow, spot where the pus is near the
surface. The swelling increases in size, the firm brawny centre becomes
By gently palpating with the finger-tips over the softened area, a fluid
wave may be detected--_fluctuation_--and when present this is a certain
against in applying this test clinically. When, for example, the walls
of the abscess are thick and rigid, or when its contents are under
excessive tension, the fluid wave cannot be elicited. On the other hand,
a sensation closely resembling fluctuation may often be recognised in
When pus has formed in deeper parts, and before it has reached the
surface, oedema of the overlying skin is frequently present, and the skin
With the formation of pus the continuous burning or boring pain of
lancinating twinges. Should doubt remain as to the presence of pus,
It may be accepted as a working rule in practice that when an acute
inflammation has lasted for four or five days without showing signs of
abatement, suppuration has almost certainly occurred. In deep-seated
suppuration, marked oedema of the skin and the occurrence of rigors and
haemophylics, have been mistaken for acute abscesses and incised, with
disastrous results.
#Treatment of Acute Abscesses.#--The dictum of John Bell, "Where there
is pus, let it out," summarises the treatment of abscess. The extent and
however, vary with the nature, site, and relations of the abscess. In a
face where a disfiguring scar is undesirable, a small puncture should be
made where the pus threatens to point, and a Klapp's suction bell be
applied as already described (p. 39). A drain is not necessary, and in
the intervals between the applications of the bell the part is covered
muscles, one or more incisions should be made, and the cavity drained by
glass or rubber tubes or by strips of rubber tissue.
second day or later, according to circumstances, the tube is removed,
second or third day.
example, in the deeper planes of the neck--_Hilton's method_ of opening
fascia, a grooved director is gently pushed through the deeper tissues
till pus escapes along its groove, and then the track is widened by
or strip of rubber tissue, is introduced, and the subsequent treatment
carried out as in other abscesses. When the drain lies in proximity to a
enough to cause ulceration of the vessel wall by pressure.
bismuth gauze, and treated by the open method.
It is seldom advisable to wash out an abscess cavity, and squeezing out
and the infection be diffused into the surrounding tissues.
opening an abscess can scarcely be exaggerated, and the rapidity with
which healing occurs when the access of fresh bacteria is prevented is
_Acute Suppuration in a Wound._--If in the course of an operation
infection of the wound has occurred, a marked inflammatory reaction soon
manifests itself, and the same changes as occur in the formation of an
can more readily reach the surface. In from twenty-four to forty-eight
hours the patient is conscious of a sensation of chilliness, or may
with impaired appetite, headache, and it may be looseness of the bowels.
His temperature rises to 100 o or 101 o F., and the pulse quickens to 100
or 110.
around are red, glazed, and oedematous. The discoloration and swelling
are most intense in the immediate vicinity of the wound, the edges of
which are everted and moist. Any stitches that may have been introduced
heat, and a constant burning or throbbing pain, which is increased by
pressure. If the stitches be cut, pus escapes, the wound gapes, and its
of which is washed off with absolute alcohol, and the wound either
out with antiseptic lotions, is attended with the risk of further
their immersion in antiseptic baths is sometimes useful. The free
temperature. The surrounding inflammation subsides, the discharge of pus
lessens, and healing takes place by the formation of granulation
tissue--the so-called "healing by second intention."
Wound infection may take place from _catgut_ which has not been
and, as a rule, do not appear for seven or eight days after the
operation, and, it may be, not till after the skin edges have united.
The suppuration is strictly localised to the part of the wound where
catgut was employed for stitches or ligatures, and shows little tendency
When suppuration occurs in connection with buried sutures of
Suppuration may occur in the track of a skin stitch, producing a _stitch
catgut or silk, or, more frequently perhaps, from the growth of
imperfectly disinfected. The formation of pus under these conditions may
some induration around the wound and a slight tenderness on pressure
there may be nothing to suggest the presence of an abscess.
_Acute Suppuration of a Mucous Membrane._--When pyogenic organisms gain
access to a mucous membrane, such as that of the bladder, urethra, or
appear that the most marked changes take place in the submucous tissue,
causing the covering epithelium in places to die and leave small
formation of stricture. When mucous glands are present in the membrane,
the pus is mixed with mucus--_muco-pus_.
DIFFUSE CELLULITIS AND DIFFUSE SUPPURATION
organism--commonly the _streptococcus pyogenes_--into the cellular
breach of the surface, although this may be superficial and
insignificant, such as a pin-prick, a scratch, or a crack under a nail,
and the wound may have been healed for some time before the inflammation
becomes manifest. The cellulitis, also, may develop at some distance
from the seat of inoculation, the organisms having travelled by the
which they develop, and the free lymphatic circulation by means of which
several patches of inflammation may appear with healthy areas between.
The pus infiltrates the meshes of the cellular tissue, there is
sloughing of considerable portions of tissue of low vitality, such as
severe, and is usually ushered in by a distinct chill or even a rigor,
while the temperature rises to 103 o, 104 o, or 105 o F. The pulse is
proportionately increased in frequency, and is small, feeble, and often
patient may become delirious, especially during the night. Leucocytosis
is present in cases of moderate severity; but in severe cases the
is absent.
constitutional disturbance is aggravated, while the local signs are
delayed, and only become prominent when pus forms and approaches the
surface. It is not uncommon for blebs containing dark serous fluid to
form on the skin. The infection frequently spreads along the line of the
main lymph vessels of the part (_septic lymphangitis_) and may reach the
With the formation of pus the skin becomes soft and boggy at several
points, and eventually breaks, giving exit to a quantity of thick
fuse, and an abscess is formed in which fluctuation can be detected.
Occasionally gases are evolved in the tissues, giving rise to emphysema.
and this may often be recognised clinically by a peculiar crunching or
grating sensation transmitted to the fingers on making firm pressure on
the part.
If it is not let out by incision, the pus, travelling along the lines of
least resistance, tends to point at several places on the surface, or to
_Prognosis._--The occurrence of _septicaemia_ is the most serious risk,
and it is in cases of diffuse suppurative cellulitis that this form of
blood-poisoning assumes its most aggravated forms. The toxins of the
streptococci are exceedingly virulent, and induce local death of tissue
lymphatics, or of infective emboli in the blood vessels, leads to the
arterial or venous trunks may take place and endanger life.
_Treatment._--The treatment of diffuse cellulitis depends to a large
extent on the situation and extent of the affected area, and on the
stage of the process.
band is practicable, Bier's method of inducing passive hyperaemia yields
excellent results. If pus is formed, one or more small incisions are
should be covered with gauze wrung out of a 1 in 10 solution of ichthyol
in glycerine. The dressing is changed as often as necessary, and in the
intervals when the band is off, gentle active and passive movements
should be carried out to prevent the formation of adhesions. After
incisions have been made, we have found the _immersion_ of the limb, for
a few hours at a time, in a water-bath containing warm boracic lotion or
eusol a useful adjuvant to the passive hyperaemia.
_Continuous irrigation_ of the part by a slow, steady stream of lotion,
at the body temperature, such as eusol, or Dakin's solution, or boracic
value.
A suitably arranged splint adds to the comfort of the patient; and the
limb should be placed in the attitude which, in the event of stiffness
example, should be flexed to a little less than a right angle; at the
wrist, the hand should be dorsiflexed and the fingers flexed slightly
towards the palm.
Massage, passive movement, hot and cold douching, and other measures,
may be necessary to get rid of the chronic oedema, adhesions of tendons,
In situations where a constricting band cannot be applied, for example,
on the trunk or the neck, Klapp's suction bells may be used, small
incisions being made to admit of the escape of pus.
If these measures fail or are impracticable, it may be necessary to make
one or more free incisions, and to insert drainage-tubes, portions of
rubber dam, or iodoform worsted.
to infection by streptococci, anti-streptococcic serum may be used.
In a few cases, amputation well above the seat of disease, by removing
the source of toxin production, offers the only means of saving the
patient.
The clinical term whitlow is applied to an acute infection, usually
followed by suppuration, commonly met with in the fingers, less
pin-prick, a puncture caused by a splinter of wood, a scratch, or even
an imperceptible lesion of the skin.
Several varieties of whitlow are recognised, but while it is convenient
clinically they merge one into another, and it is not always possible to
originated.
_Initial Stage._--Attention is usually first attracted to the condition
by a sensation of tightness in the finger and tenderness when the part
is squeezed or knocked against anything. In the course of a few hours
the part becomes red and swollen; there is continuous pain, which soon
assumes a throbbing character, particularly when the hand is dependent,
and may be so severe as to prevent sleep, and the patient may feel
generally out of sorts.
If a constricting band is applied at this stage, the infection can
usually be checked and the occurrence of suppuration prevented. If this
latter being raised as a blister in which fluctuation can be detected
When the blister forms near the tip of the finger, the pus burrows under
lymphangitis may extend a short distance up the forearm. By clipping
away the raised epidermis, and if necessary the nail, the pus is allowed
to escape, and healing speedily takes place.
who handle septic material, occurs in the sulcus between the nail and
the skin, and is due to the introduction of infective matter at the root
and discomfort, interfering with sleep, and producing a constitutional
reaction out of all proportion to the local lesion.
area, or, it may be, to remove the nail entirely. If only a small
  a = Purulent blister.
  b = Suppuration at nail fold.
  d = Whitlow in sheath of flexor tendon (e). ]
spreads towards the palm of the hand. The finger becomes red, swollen,
night and prevents sleep, and the part is extremely tender on pressure.
When the palm is invaded there may be marked oedema of the back of the
hand, the dense integument of the palm preventing the swelling from
fluctuation cannot be detected. The patient is usually able to flex the
finger to a certain extent without increasing the pain--a point which
indicates that the tendon sheaths have not been invaded. The
suppurative process may, however, spread to the tendon sheaths, or even
to the bone. Sometimes the excessive tension and virulent toxins induce
actual gangrene of the distal part, or even of the whole finger. There
reaching 101 o or 102 o F.
avoid opening the tendon sheath lest the infection be conveyed to it.
Moist dressings should be employed while the suppuration lasts. Carbolic
inducing gangrene.
infection is on the sheaths of the flexor tendons, but it is not always
the subcutaneous cellular tissue (Fig. 9, d). In some cases both
painful, and swollen, the swelling spreading to the dorsum. The
involvement of the tendon sheath is usually indicated by the patient
being unable to flex the finger, and by the pain being increased when he
attempts to do so. On account of the anatomical arrangement of the
case of the other fingers--and there give rise to a diffuse cellulitis
which may result in sloughing of fasciae and tendons. When the infection
spreads into the common flexor sheath under the transverse carpal
(anterior annular) ligament, it is not uncommon for the intercarpal and
wrist joints to become implicated. Impaired movement of tendons and
joints is, therefore, a common sequel to this variety of whitlow.
The _treatment_ consists in inducing passive hyperaemia by Bier's method,
and, if this is done early, suppuration may be avoided. If pus forms,
small incisions are made, under local anaesthesia, to relieve the tension
in the sheath and to diminish the risk of the tendons sloughing. No form
above the wrist. Passive movements and massage must be commenced as
formation of adhesions and resulting stiffness.
subcutaneous or of the thecal variety, but in some cases the
It may lead to necrosis of a portion or even of the entire phalanx. This
is usually recognised by the persistence of suppuration long after the
acute symptoms have passed off, and by feeling bare bone with the probe.
lateral mobility and grating may be elicited. Recovery does not take
place until the dead bone is removed, and the usefulness of the finger
is often seriously impaired by fibrous or bony ankylosis of the
interphalangeal joints. This may render amputation advisable when a
_Cellulitis of the forearm_ is usually a sequel to one of the deeper
In the _region of the elbow-joint_, cellulitis is common around the
olecranon. It may originate as an inflammation of the olecranon bursa,
or may invade the bursa secondarily. In exceptional cases the
elbow-joint is also involved.
Cellulitis of the _axilla_ may originate in suppuration in the lymph
septic wound on the chest wall or in the neck. In some cases it is
impossible to discover the primary seat of infection. A firm, brawny
swelling forms in the armpit and extends on to the chest wall. It is
attended with great pain, which is increased on moving the arm, and
pus forms in the axillary space, the treatment consists in making free
avoid the axillary vessels and nerves. If the pus spreads on to the
chest wall, the abscess should be opened below the clavicle by Hilton's
Cellulitis of the _sole of the foot_ may follow whitlow of the toes.
In the _region of the ankle_ cellulitis is not common; but _around the
the popliteal lymph glands, and may endanger the knee-joint. It is also
met with in the _groin_ following on inflammation and suppuration of the
has implicated the femoral vessels and led to secondary haemorrhage.
Cellulitis of the scalp, orbit, neck, pelvis, and perineum will be
considered with the diseases of these regions.
CHRONIC SUPPURATION
with--for example, in the breast and in the marrow of long bones--in the
great majority of instances the formation of a chronic or cold abscess
is the result of the action of the tubercle bacillus. It is therefore
(p. 139).
cutaneous or mucous surface. It usually represents the path by which the
discharge escapes from an abscess cavity that has been prevented from
closing completely, either from mechanical causes or from the persistent
formation of discharge which must find an exit. A sinus is lined by
granulation tissue, and when it is of long standing the opening may be
scar tissue around it. As a sinus will persist until the obstacle to
closure of the original abscess is removed, it is necessary that this
bone, an infected ligature, or a bullet, acting mechanically or by
keeping up discharge, and if the body is removed the sinus usually
until the muscle is kept at rest by a splint, or put out of action by
division of its fibres. The sinuses associated with empyema are
prevented from healing by the rigidity of the chest wall, and will only
close after an operation which admits of the cavity being obliterated.
In any case it is necessary to disinfect the track, and, it may be, to
remove the unhealthy granulations lining it, by means of the sharp
spoon, or to excise it bodily. To encourage healing from the bottom the
long and tortuous sinuses is often hastened by the injection of Beck's
cicatricial contraction--for example, in a sinus over the lower jaw
surfaces approximated with stitches.
The _tuberculous sinus_ is described under Tuberculosis.
A #fistula# is an abnormal canal passing from a mucous surface to the
skin or to another mucous surface. Fistulae resulting from suppuration
on the cheek, as a salivary fistula; beside the inner angle of the eye,
as a lacrymal fistula; near the ear, as a mastoid fistula; or close to
the anus, as a fistula-in-ano. Intestinal fistulae are sometimes met with
appendicitis, tuberculous peritonitis, and other conditions. In the
fistula_).
the sections dealing with the regions in which they occur.
_Congenital fistulae_, such as occur in the neck from imperfect closure
of branchial clefts, or in the abdomen from unobliterated foetal ducts
such as the urachus or Meckel's diverticulum, will be described in their
proper places.
Pyaemia certain general effects of pyogenic infection, which, although
combination, or one may follow on and merge into another.
products of pyogenic bacteria. These products, which are of the nature
of alkaloids, act immediately on their entrance into the circulation,
and produce effects in direct proportion to the amount absorbed. As the
no more are introduced they disappear. Sapraemia in these respects,
therefore, is comparable to poisoning by any other form of alkaloid,
_Clinical Features._--The symptoms of sapraemia seldom manifest
their poisons. The onset of the condition is marked by a feeling of
chilliness, sometimes amounting to a rigor, and a rise of temperature to
102 o, 103 o, or 104 o F., with morning remissions (Fig. 10). The heart's
action is markedly depressed, and the pulse is soft and compressible.
The appetite is lost, the tongue dry and covered with a thin
vomiting of dark coffee-ground material are often prominent features.
Death is usually impending when the skin becomes cold and clammy, the
mucous membranes livid, the pulse feeble and fluttering, the discharges
involuntary, and when a low form of muttering delirium is present.
[Illustration: FIG. 10.--Charts of Acute sapraemia from (a) case of
A local form of septic infection is always present--it may be an
abscess, an infected compound fracture, or an infection of the cavity of
the uterus, for example, from a retained portion of placenta.
of the infected material. The wound must be freely opened, all
disinfected by washing with sterilised salt solution, peroxide of
On account of its power of neutralising toxins, iodoform is useful in
gauze, and treating it by the open method, if this is possible.
The general treatment is carried out on the same lines as for other
infective conditions.
#Chronic sapraemia or Hectic Fever.#--Hectic fever differs from acute
with pyogenic organisms. It is gradual in its development, and is of a
mild type throughout.
[Illustration: FIG. 11.--Chart of Hectic Fever.]
The pulse is small, feeble, and compressible, and the temperature rises
in the afternoon or evening to 102 o or 103 o F. (Fig. 11), the cheeks
becoming characteristically flushed. In the early morning the
temperature falls to normal or below it, and the patient breaks into a
becomes rapidly and markedly emaciated, even although in some cases the
appetite remains good and is even voracious.
The poisons circulating in the blood produce _waxy degeneration_ in
process begins in the arterial walls, and spreads thence to the
connective-tissue structures, causing marked enlargement of the affected
organs. Albuminuria, ascites, oedema of the lower limbs, clubbing of the
fingers, and diarrhoea are among the most prominent symptoms of this
The _prognosis_ in hectic fever depends on the completeness with which
the further absorption of toxins can be prevented. In many cases this
can only be effected by an operation which provides for free drainage,
is best treated by the open method. Even advanced waxy degeneration does
not contra-indicate this line of treatment, as the diseased organs
taking place is completely eradicated.
[Illustration: FIG. 12.--Chart of case of Septicaemia followed by
#Septicaemia.#--This form of blood-poisoning is the result of the action
of pyogenic bacteria, which not only produce their toxins at the primary
seat of infection, but themselves enter the blood-stream and are carried
to other parts, where they settle and produce further effects.
In such conditions as acute osteomyelitis or acute peritonitis, we see
temperature rises to 103 o or 104 o F., although in very severe cases the
temperature may remain subnormal throughout, the virulence of the toxins
preventing reaction. It is in the general appearance of the patient and
severity of the condition. If the pulse remains firm, full, and regular,
and does not exceed 110 or even 120, while the temperature is moderately
raised, the outlook is hopeful; but when the pulse becomes small and
the temperature is low, a grave prognosis is indicated. The tongue is
often dry and coated with a black crust down the centre, while the sides
are red. It is a good omen when the tongue becomes moist again. Thirst
is most distressing, especially in septicaemia of intestinal origin.
Persistent vomiting of dark-brown material is often present, and
diarrhoea with blood-stained stools is not uncommon. The urine is small
accumulate, the respiration becomes shallow and laboured, the face of a
dull ashy grey, the nose pinched, and the skin cold and clammy.
Capillary haemorrhages sometimes take place in the skin or mucous
membranes; and in a certain proportion of cases cutaneous eruptions
to errors in diagnosis. In other cases there is slight jaundice. The
The _prognosis_ is always grave, and depends on the possibility of
completely eradicating the focus of infection, and on the reserve force
the patient has to carry him over the period during which he is
is less likely to be successful owing to the organisms having entered
the circulation. When possible, the primary focus of infection should be
#Pyaemia# is a form of blood-poisoning characterised by the development
are thus introduced into the blood, not only at the primary seat of
infection is usually in a wound--for example, a compound fracture--but
cases occur in which the point of entrance of the bacteria is not
discoverable. The dissemination of the organisms takes place through the
medium of infected emboli which form in a thrombosed vein in the
vicinity of the original lesion, and, breaking loose, are carried
thence in the blood-stream. These emboli lodge in the minute vessels of
and these in turn may be the starting-point of new emboli which give
rise to fresh areas of pus formation. The organs above named are the
the bone marrow, the substance of muscles, the heart and pericardium,
lymph glands, subcutaneous tissue, or, in fact, in any tissue of the
body. Organisms circulating in the blood are prone to lodge on the
[Illustration: FIG. 13.--Chart of Pyaemia following on Acute
Osteomyelitis.]
_Clinical Features._--Before antiseptic surgery was practised, pyaemia
infinitely less common, but appears also to be of a less severe type.
Its rarity and its mildness may be related as cause and effect, because
it was formerly found that pyaemia contracted from a pyaemic patient was
more virulent than that from other sources.
In contrast with sapraemia and septicaemia, pyaemia is late of developing,
and it seldom begins within a week of the primary infection. The first
half an hour, during which time the temperature rises to 103 o, 104 o, or
105 o F. In the course of an hour it begins to fall again, and the
patient breaks into a profuse sweat. The temperature may fall several
degrees, but seldom reaches the normal. In a few days there is a second
may be repeated at diminishing intervals during the course of the
illness (Figs. 12 and 13). The pulse is soft, and tends to remain
abnormally rapid even when the temperature falls nearly to normal.
are bright. A characteristic sweetish odour, which has been compared to
that of new-mown hay, can be detected in the breath and may pervade the
profuse diarrhoea; and the patient emaciates rapidly. The skin is
erythema sometimes appear scattered over the body. The skin may assume a
dull sallow or earthy hue, or a bright yellow icteric tint may appear.
supervenes.
severe pain, gradually extending from behind the angle of the jaw on to
the face. There is also swelling over the gland, and eventually
Secondary abscesses in the lymph glands, subcutaneous tissue, or joints
are often so insidious and painless in their development that they are
often takes place with remarkable rapidity, and with little impairment
it once was, a considerable proportion of the patients recovering. In
being due to toxaemia. Chronic cases often run a long course, lasting for
following on prolonged suppuration.
_Treatment._--In such conditions as compound fractures and severe
lacerated wounds, much can be done to avert the conditions which lead to
pyaemia, by applying a Bier's constricting bandage as soon as there is
evidence of infection having taken place, or even if there is reason to
suspect that the wound is not aseptic.
If sepsis is already established, and evidence of general infection is
present, the wound should be opened up sufficiently to admit of thorough
disinfection and drainage, and the constricting bandage applied to aid
dissemination of infective material from the primary source of
infection.
affected part, but this is seldom feasible except in the case of the
internal jugular vein for infection of the transverse sinus.
Secondary abscesses must be aspirated or opened and drained whenever
of pyogenic infection.
CHAPTER V
ULCERATION AND ULCERS
Definitions--Clinical examination of an ulcer--The healing
    sore.--Classification of ulcers--A. According to cause:
    _Stationary_, _Spreading_.--Treatment.
The process of _ulceration_ may be defined as the molecular or cellular
abscess, at once escapes on the surface.
An _ulcer_ is an open wound or sore in which there are present certain
conditions tending to prevent it undergoing the natural process of
repair. Of these, one of the most important is the presence of
pathogenic bacteria, which by their action not only prevent healing, but
so irritate and destroy the tissues as to lead to an actual increase in
or chronic venous congestion may impede healing; as may also induration
of the surrounding area, by preventing the contraction which is such an
example, Bright's disease, diabetes, or syphilis--the vitiated state of
the tissues is an impediment to repair. Mechanical causes, such as
unsuitable dressings or ill-fitting appliances, may also act in the same
#Clinical Examination of an Ulcer.#--In examining any ulcer, we
granulations, their disposition, size, colour, vascularity, and whether
they are depressed or elevated in relation to the surrounding parts. (2)
odour. (3) The _edges_, noting particularly whether or not the marginal
depressed. (4) The _surrounding tissues_, as to whether they are
congested, oedematous, inflamed, indurated, or otherwise. (5) Whether or
not there is _pain_ or tenderness in the raw surface or its
surroundings. (6) The _part of the body_ on which it occurs, because
ulcer in the lower third of the leg, the perforating ulcer on the sole
of the foot, and so on.
#The Healing Sore.#--If a portion of skin be excised aseptically, and no
days this is replaced by the growth of _granulations_, which are of
uniform size, of a pinkish-red colour, and moist with a slight serous
exudate containing a few dead leucocytes. They grow until they reach the
level of the surrounding skin, and so fill the gap with a fine velvety
mass of granulation tissue. At the edges, the young epithelium may be
which gradually covers the sore, becoming paler in colour as it
the cicatrix. There is no pain, and the surrounding parts are healthy.
This may be used as a type with which to compare the ulcers seen at the
these differ from the type; and that we may in addition recognise the
conditions that have to be counteracted before the characters of the
in which bacterial infection with pathogenic bacteria has taken place.
The layer of coagulated blood and lymph becomes liquefied and is thrown
formation of minute sloughs and a quantity of pus.
The discharge is profuse, thin, acrid, and offensive, and consists of
breaking-down of the tissues at its margins. The surrounding parts are
hot, red, swollen, and oedematous; and there is pain and tenderness both
in the sore itself and in the parts around.
and gives rise to great confusion, chiefly for the reason that no one
according to the causes at work in producing or maintaining them--for
and others according to the condition in which they happen to be when
So long as we retain these names it will be impossible to find a single
and so generally understood that it is undesirable to abolish them. We
must therefore remain content with a clinical arrangement of ulcers,--it
cannot be called a classification,--considering any given ulcer from two
This method of studying ulcers has the practical advantage that it
furnishes us with the main indications for treatment as well as for
diagnosis: the cause must be removed, and the condition so modified as
A. #Arrangement of Ulcers according to their Cause.#--Although any given
describe the following groups:
course of a few days the damaged area of skin becomes of a greyish
unhealthy raw surface when the slough separates.
_Heat_ and _prolonged exposure to the Rontgen rays_ or _to radium
emanations_ act in a similar way.
skin sloughs, leaving an open sore. This is most liable to occur in
bone. On removing the splint, the skin of the part pressed upon is found
_bed-sore_ are also due to prolonged pressure.
Pigmentation of the Skin.]
_Ulcers due to Imperfect Circulation._--Imperfect circulation is an
anastomosis between the superficial and deep veins of the leg is less
free than elsewhere, so that the extra stress thrown upon the surface
veins interferes with the nutrition of the skin (Hilton). The importance
of imperfect venous return in the causation of such ulcers is evidenced
by the fact that as soon as the condition of the circulation is improved
by confining the patient to bed and elevating the limb, the ulcer begins
The presence of varicose veins is frequently associated with a
the surface and permit of infection which leads to ulceration. Varicose
ulcers may also originate from the bursting of a small peri-phlebitic
abscess.
ulcer usually become thrombosed, and in time are reduced to fibrous
complication. In smaller and more superficial ulcers, however, the
destructive process is liable to implicate the wall of the vessel before
the occurrence of thrombosis, and to lead to profuse and it may be
dangerous bleeding.
These ulcers are at first small and superficial, but from want of care,
from continued standing or walking, or from injudicious treatment, they
for ulcers due to syphilis. The base of the ulcer is covered with
imperfectly formed, soft, oedematous granulations, which give off a thin
sero-purulent discharge. The edges are slightly inflamed, and show no
evidence of healing. The parts around are usually pigmented and slightly
oedematous, and as a rule there is little pain. This variety of ulcer is
particularly prone to pass into the condition known as callous.
In _anaemic_ patients, especially young girls, ulcers are occasionally
with imperfect venous return. They are slow to heal, and tend to pass
into the condition known as weak.
For example, _trophic_ ulcers are liable to occur in injuries or
diseases of the spinal cord, in cerebral paralysis, in limbs weakened by
poliomyelitis, in ascending or peripheral neuritis, or after injuries of
nerve-trunks.
The _acute bed-sore_ is a rapidly progressing form of ulceration, often
their trophic nerve-supply has been interfered with.
[Illustration: FIG. 15.--Perforating Ulcers of Sole of Foot.
paralysis, locomotor ataxia, or syringo-myelia (Fig. 15). It also occurs
in patients suffering from glycosuria, and is usually associated with
frequently under the head of the metatarsal bone of the great toe. A
spreads deeper and deeper, till eventually the bone or joint is reached,
"perforating ulcer." The flexor tendons are sometimes destroyed, the toe
being so disproportionate to its superficial area, the condition closely
The raw surface is absolutely insensitive, so that the probe can be
freely employed without the patient even being aware of it or suffering
the least discomfort--a significant fact in diagnosis. The cavity is
interference with the trophic nerve-supply of the parts, and to the fact
down to the deepest part of the ulcer and so prevents closure. While
they are commonest on the sole of the foot and other parts subjected to
pressure, perforating ulcers are met with on the sides and dorsum of the
foot and toes, on the hands, and on other parts where no pressure has
been exerted.
joints, or over the ribs and sternum, usually results from the bursting
covered with feeble granulations and grey shreddy sloughs. The edges are
of a dull blue or purple colour, and gradually thin out towards their
free margins, and in addition are characteristically undermined, so that
perforations often occur through the skin, and a thin, watery discharge,
_Bazin's Disease._--This term is applied to an affection of the skin and
is met with almost exclusively between the knee and the ankle, and it
constitution, in whose family history there is evidence of a tuberculous
character, notably enlarged cervical glands, and phlyctenular
ophthalmia. The tubercle bacillus has rarely been found, but we have
always observed characteristic epithelioid cells and giant cells in
sections made from the edge or floor of the ulcer.
[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Bazin's Disease in a girl aet. 16.]
gummata (Fig. 16). Fresh crops of nodules appear in the neighbourhood of
affection is sometimes painful, but with the formation of the ulcer the
The disease runs a chronic course, and may slowly extend over a wide
area in spite of the usual methods of treatment. After lasting for some
months, or even years, however, it may eventually undergo spontaneous
cure. The most satisfactory treatment is to excise the affected tissues
[Illustration: FIG. 17.--Syphilitic Ulcers in region of Knee, showing
The _syphilitic ulcer_ is usually formed by the breaking down of a
mucous membrane covering it, it appears as a tough greyish slough,
less circular, deep, punched-out gap which shows a few feeble unhealthy
granulations and small sloughs on its floor. The edges are raised and
There are usually several such ulcers together, and as they tend to heal
part of the body, but are most frequent in the upper part of the leg
(Fig. 17), especially around the knee-joint in women, and over the ribs
and sternum. On healing, they usually leave a depressed and adherent
cicatrix.
tendency to bleed, with the formation of clots, which dry and form a
In _gouty_ patients small ulcers which are exceedingly irritable and
_Ulcers associated with Malignant Disease._--Cancer and sarcoma when
situated in the subcutaneous tissue may destroy the overlying skin so
essentially different in their nature from all other forms of ulcers,
growths of the skin.
at an opinion as to the cause of a given ulcer, and placed it in one or
condition do I find this ulcer at the present moment?
Any ulcer is in one of three states--healing, stationary, or spreading;
although it is not uncommon to find healing going on at one part while
of granulation tissue, which becomes converted into connective tissue,
Those ulcers which are _stationary_--that is, neither healing nor
spreading--may be in one of several conditions.
_The Weak Condition._--Any ulcer may get into a weak state from
quality. The granulations are small and smooth, and of a pale yellow or
serum and a few pus cells, and as this dries on the edges it forms scabs
which interfere with the growth of epithelium.
heart or kidney disease, or from local causes, such as varicose veins,
the granulations share in the oedema, and there is an abundant serous
The excessive use of moist dressings leads to a third variety of weak
and flabby, projecting beyond the level of the skin and overlapping the
indurated swelling of surrounding parts.]
_The Callous Condition._--This condition is usually met with in ulcers
of varicose veins. It is chiefly met with in hospital practice. The want
of healing is mainly due to impeded venous return and to oedema and
induration of the surrounding skin and cellular tissues (Fig. 18). The
induration results from coagulation and partial organisation of the
inflammatory effusion, and prevents the necessary contraction of the
of the swollen, thickened, and white edges, and presents a glazed
irregular. The discharge is usually watery, and cakes in the dressing.
The prolonged hyperaemia of the tissues in relation to a callous ulcer of
the leg often leads to changes in the underlying bones. The periosteum
is abnormally thick and vascular, the superficial layers of the bone
extent, follow the line of attachment of the interosseous membrane and
of the intermuscular septa" (Cathcart) (Fig. 19). When the whole
thickness of the soft tissues is destroyed by the ulcerative process,
the area of bone that comes to form the base of the ulcer projects as a
flat, porous node, which in its turn may be eroded. These changes as
seen in the macerated specimen are often mistaken for disease
originating in the bone.
The _irritable condition_ is met with in ulcers which occur, as a rule,
just above the external malleolus in women of neurotic temperament. They
probe points of excessive tenderness may be discovered. These, Hilton
_The Inflamed Condition._--Any ulcer may become acutely inflamed from
the access of fresh organisms, aided by mechanical irritation from
trauma, ill-fitting splints or bandages, or want of rest, or from
example of an inflamed ulcer is the venereal soft sore. The base of the
ulcer becomes red and angry-looking, the granulations disappear, and a
copious discharge of thin yellow pus, mixed with blood, escapes. Sloughs
of granulation tissue or of connective tissue may form. The edges become
red, ragged, and everted, and the ulcer increases in size by spreading
and there is usually some constitutional disturbance.
The _phagedaenic condition_ is the result of an ulcer being infected with
leads to a widespread destruction of tissue. It is also met with in the
throat in some cases of scarlet fever, and may give rise to fatal
haemorrhage by ulcerating into large blood vessels. All the local and
constitutional signs of a severe septic infection are present.
suffering to the patient, crippling and incapacitating him for his work,
but is a distinct and constant menace to his health: the prolonged
diseases; phlebitis, with formation of septic emboli, leading to pyaemia,
is liable to occur; and in old persons it is not uncommon for ulcers of
long standing to become the seat of cancer. In addition, the offensive
discomfort to others. The primary object of treatment in any ulcer is to
effected, nature will do the rest, provided extraneous sources of
irritation are excluded.
Steps must be taken to facilitate the venous return from the ulcerated
reaches it. The septic element must be eliminated by disinfecting the
ulcer and its surroundings, and any other sources of irritation must be
removed.
If the patient's health is below par, good nourishing food, tonics, and
general hygienic treatment are indicated.
sore is a layer of Lister's perforated oiled-silk protective, which is
made to cover the raw surface and the skin for about a quarter of an
the part should be kept at rest, and the position should be adjusted so
wiping. The area round the sore should be cleansed before the fresh
In some cases, healing goes on more rapidly under a dressing of weak
boracic ointment (one-quarter the strength of the pharmacopoeial
preparation). The growth of epithelium may be stimulated by a 6 to 8 per
Dusting powders and poultice dressings are best avoided in the treatment
of healing sores.
healthy and aseptic, skin-grafts may safely be placed on them directly.
If, however, their asepticity cannot be relied upon, it is necessary to
#Treatment of Special Varieties of Ulcers.#--Before beginning to treat a
causative conditions present? and second, In what condition do I find
the ulcer?--in other words, In what particulars does it differ from a
one, means must be taken to counteract it. This done, the condition of
the ulcer must be so modified as to bring it into the state of a healing
sore, after which it will be managed on the lines already laid down.
#Treatment in relation to the Cause of the Ulcer.#--_Traumatic
Group._--The _prophylaxis_ of these ulcers consists in excluding
bacteria, by cleansing crushed or bruised parts, and applying sterilised
dressings and properly adjusted splints. If there is reason to fear that
asepticity should it do so. In the event of the skin giving way, the
same form of dressing should be continued till the slough has separated
appropriate to a healing sore is then substituted. _Pressure sores_ are
treated on the same lines.
In _ulcers of the leg due to interference with the venous return_, the
primary indication is to elevate the limb in order to facilitate the
on blocks, so that the ulcer lies on a higher level than the heart.
Should varicose veins be present, the question of operative treatment
When an _imperfect nerve supply_ is the main factor underlying ulcer
formation, prophylaxis is the chief consideration. In patients suffering
the peripheral nerves, all sources of irritation, such as ill-fitting
or otherwise, must be carefully protected by pads of wool, air-cushions,
antiseptics must be employed for bathing and dressing it, and as far as
possible all dressings should be dry.
The _perforating ulcer_ of the foot calls for special treatment. To
avoid pressure on the sole of the foot, the patient must be confined to
bed. As the main local obstacle to healing is the down-growth of
knife or sharp spoon. The base also should be excised, and any bone
parts are insensitive an anaesthetic is not required. After the ulcer has
healed, the patient should wear in his boot a thick felt sole with a
hole cut out opposite the situation of the cicatrix. When a joint has
been opened into, the difficulty of thoroughly getting rid of all
stump if pressure is put upon it. The treatment of any nervous disease
or glycosuria which may coexist is, of course, indicated.
Exposure of the plantar nerves by an incision behind the medial
by Chipault and others in the treatment of perforating ulcers of the
foot.
with soda fomentations, removing the unhealthy granulations, and
associated with such diseases as tuberculosis, syphilis, diabetes,
Bright's disease, scurvy, or gout, these must receive appropriate
mention. If the ulcer is of limited extent and situated on an exposed
part of the body, the most satisfactory method is complete removal, by
and of all the infected area around it, so as to leave a healthy surface
from which granulations may spring up. Should the raw surface left be
likely to result in an unsightly scar or in cicatricial contraction,
parts, or when operative treatment is contra-indicated, the use of
No ulcerative process responds so readily to medicinal treatment as the
preparations of the "606" or "914" groups or to full doses of iodide of
potassium and mercury, and the local application of black wash. When the
ulceration has lasted for a long time, however, and is widespread and
#Treatment in relation to the Condition of the Ulcer.#--_Ulcers in a
or kidney disease, these affections must first be treated. Locally, the
imperfect granulations should be scraped away, and some stimulating
smeared with a 6 to 8 per cent. ointment of scarlet-red, the surrounding
boracic lint wrung out of red lotion (2 grains of sulphate of zinc, and
covered with a layer of gutta-percha tissue, is also useful.
When the condition has resulted from the prolonged use of moist
dressings, these must be stopped, the redundant granulations clipped
away with scissors, the surface rubbed with silver nitrate or sulphate
When the ulcer has assumed the characters of a healing sore, skin-grafts
directions--(1) The infective element must be eliminated. When the ulcer
useful as a preliminary step. The base of the ulcer and the thickened
resulting raw surface sponged over with undiluted carbolic acid or
facilitated by elevation of the limb and massage. (3) The induration of
the surrounding parts must be got rid of before contraction of the sore
is possible. For this purpose the free application of blisters, as first
painted over the parts, or a large fly-blister (emplastrum cantharidis)
applied all round the ulcer, speedily disperses the inflammatory
products which cause the induration. The use of elastic pressure or of
strapping, of hot-air baths, or the making of multiple incisions in the
skin around the ulcer, fulfils the same object.
As soon as the ulcer assumes the characters of a healing sore, it should
be covered with skin-grafts, which furnish a much better cicatrix than
A more radical method of treatment consists in excising the whole
ulcer, including its edges and about a quarter of an inch of the
his lying up in bed, the healing of the ulcer is much delayed. He should
an elevated position, and must constantly wear a firm bandage of
_elastic webbing_. This webbing is porous and admits of evaporation of
and should always be applied while the patient is in the recumbent
the morning. Additional support is given to the veins if the bandage is
applied as a figure of eight.
We have found the following method satisfactory in out-patient
practice. The patient lying on a couch, the limb is raised about
excess of blood has left it. With the limb still raised, the ulcer with
the surrounding skin is covered with a layer, about half an inch thick,
of finely powdered boracic acid, and the leg, from foot to knee,
This is held in position by ordinary cotton bandages, painted over with
liquid starch; while the starch is drying the limb is kept elevated.
With this appliance the patient may continue to work, and the dressing
and ichthyol or other soothing applications may be used to allay the
pain.
The _phagedaenic ulcer_ calls for more energetic means of disinfection;
poultices are then applied until the spread of the disease is arrested.
For the _irritable ulcer_ the most satisfactory treatment is complete
excision and subsequent skin-grafting.
CHAPTER VI
    gangrene_; _Gangrene following ligation of arteries_; _Gangrene
    from mechanical causes_; _Gangrene from heat, chemical agents, and
    _Gangrene from ergot_. Bacterial varieties of gangrene.
    _Malignant oedema_; _Acute emphysematous_ or _gas gangrene_;
    _Cancrum oris_, _etc_. Bed-sores: _Acute_; _chronic_.
Gangrene or mortification is the process by which a portion of tissue
to be described in regional surgery.
TYPES OF GANGRENE
Two distinct types of gangrene are met with, which, from their most
Speaking generally, it may be said that dry gangrene is essentially due
to a simple _interference with the blood supply_ of a part; while the
main factor in the production of moist gangrene is _bacterial
The cardinal signs of gangrene are: change in the colour of the part,
the affected part, resulting from such causes as the gradual narrowing
of the lumen of the arteries by disease of their coats, or the blocking
of the main vessel by an embolus.
As the fluids in the tissues are lost by evaporation the part becomes
dry and shrivelled, and as the skin is usually intact, infection does
not take place, or if it does, the want of moisture renders the part an
unsuitable soil, and the organisms do not readily find a footing. Any
spread of the process that may take place is chiefly influenced by the
as it reaches an area rich in anastomotic vessels. The dead portion is
then cast off, the irritation resulting from the contact of the dead
with the still living tissue inducing the formation of granulations on
dead portion produce a furrow--the _line of demarcation_--which
gradually deepens until complete separation is effected. As the muscles
and bones have a richer blood supply than the integument, the death of
skin and subcutaneous tissues extends higher than that of muscles and
bone, with the result that the stump left after spontaneous separation
_Clinical Features._--The part undergoing mortification becomes colder
than normal, the temperature falling to that of the surrounding
is accompanied by severe neuralgic pain in the part, probably due to
axis cylinders by the dead and dying tissues around them. This pain soon
pigment throughout the tissues. There is no putrefaction, and therefore
no putrid odour; and the condition being non-infective, there is not
necessarily any constitutional disturbance. In itself, therefore, dry
possible means of entrance for bacteria, which may lead to infective
and so affording a favourable soil for the development of bacteria. The
to a rapid and wide spread of the process. The skin becomes moist and
macerated, and bullae, containing dark-coloured fluid or gases, form
become emphysematous and crepitant and produce an offensive odour. The
tissues assume a greenish-black colour from the formation in them of a
sulphide of iron resulting from decomposition of the blood pigment.
Under certain conditions the dead part may undergo changes resembling
more closely those of ordinary post-mortem decomposition. Owing to its
protective processes, and it usually continues until the condition
The _clinical features_ vary in the different varieties of moist
gangrene, but the local results of bacterial action and the
constitutional disturbance associated with toxin absorption are present
in all; the prognosis therefore is grave in the extreme.
From what has been said, it will be gathered that in dry gangrene there
indication being to prevent the access of bacteria to the dead part, and
especially to the surface exposed at the line of demarcation. In moist
gangrene, on the contrary, organisms having already obtained a footing,
immediate removal of the dead and dying tissues, as a rule, offers the
only hope of saving life.
VARIETIES OF GANGRENE
#Varieties of Gangrene essentially due to Interference with the
Circulation#
on interference with the circulation, it is to be borne in mind that the
clinical course of the affection may be profoundly influenced by
superadded infection with micro-organisms. Although the bacteria do not
play the most important part in producing tissue necrosis, their
change the whole aspect of affairs and convert a dry form of gangrene
into one of the moist type. Moreover, the low state of vitality of the
tissues, and the extreme difficulty of securing and maintaining asepsis,
death produced by a _gradual_ diminution in the quantity of blood
passing through the parts, as a result of arterio-sclerosis or other
chronic disease of the arteries leading to diminution of their calibre.
the term indicates, it occurs in old persons, but the patient's age is
to be reckoned by the condition of his arteries rather than by the
number of his years. Thus the vessels of a comparatively young man who
has suffered from syphilis and been addicted to alcohol are more liable
to atheromatous degeneration leading to this form of gangrene than are
This form of gangrene is much more common in men than in women. While it
the outset. It must clearly be understood that any form of gangrene may
occur in old persons, the term senile being here restricted to that
variety which results from arterio-sclerosis.
demarcation.]
_Clinical Features._--The commonest seat of the disease is in the toes,
especially the great toe, whence it spreads up the foot to the heel, or
injury preceding its onset. The vitality of the tissues is so low that
injury, such as a cut while paring a toe-nail or a corn, a blister
cases the actual gangrene is determined by thrombosis of the popliteal
or tibial arteries, which are already narrowed by obliterating
endarteritis.
before the onset of definite signs of gangrene, with cold feet, with
tingling and loss of feeling, or a peculiar sensation as if walking on
cotton wool.
The first evidence of the death of the part varies in different cases.
and gradually increases in size; or a blister containing blood-stained
fluid may form. Streaks or patches of dark-blue mottling appear higher
sores on the toes of old persons are always to be looked upon with
suspicion and treated with the greatest care; and the urine should be
examined for sugar. There is often severe, deep-seated pain of a
and decidedly, the presumption is that the circulation in the parts
temperature rises and other evidences of toxaemia appear.
_Prophylaxis._--The toes and feet of old people, the condition of whose
circulation predisposes them to gangrene, should be protected from
slight injuries such as may be received while paring nails, cutting
corns, or wearing ill-fitting boots. The patient should also be warned
the feet near a fire. Attempts have been made to improve the peripheral
circulation by establishing an anastomosis between the main artery of a
results have proved disappointing. (See _Op. Surg._, p. 29.)
_Treatment._--When there is evidence that gangrene has occurred, the
after careful drying to wrap it in a thick layer of absorbent and
be sufficient to diminish the amount of blood entering the part.
Hot-bottles are to be used with the utmost caution. As absolute dryness
is essential, ointments or other greasy dressings are to be avoided, as
should be carefully dieted.
When the gangrene is limited to the toes in old and feeble patients,
This takes place so slowly, however, that it necessitates the patient
majority in advising early amputation.
In this connection it is worthy of note that there are certain points at
which gangrene naturally tends to become arrested--namely, at the highly
great toe often stops when it reaches the metatarso-phalangeal joint; or
tarso-metatarsal or at the ankle joint. If these be passed, it usually
spreads up the leg to just below the knee before signs of arrestment
appear. Further, it is seen from pathological specimens that the spread
is greater on the dorsal than on the plantar aspect, and that the death
muscle.
the patella in the anterior flap. The most satisfactory operation in
controlled by digital pressure, and the use of a tourniquet should be
dispensed with, as the constriction of the limb is liable to interfere
When the tibial vessels can be felt pulsating at the ankle it may be
justifiable, if the patient urgently desires it, to amputate lower than
the knee; but there is considerable risk of gangrene recurring in the
knee seldom succeeds, is explained by the fact that the vascular
obstruction is usually in the upper part of the posterior tibial artery,
and the operation is therefore performed through tissues with an
should be removed at the amputation by squeezing the vessel from above
It is to be borne in mind that the object of amputation in these cases
the discomfort and the risks from infection which its presence involves.
While it is true that in many of these patients the operation is borne
remarkably well, it must be borne in mind that those who suffer from
senile gangrene are of necessity bad lives, and a guarded opinion should
[Illustration: FIG. 21.--Embolic Gangrene of Hand and Arm.]
#Embolic Gangrene# (Fig. 21).--This is the most typical form of gangrene
resulting from the _sudden_ occlusion of the main artery of a part,
maintain the vitality of the tissues.
There is sudden pain at the site of impaction of the embolus, and the
pulses beyond are lost. The limb becomes cold, numb, insensitive, and
powerless. It is often pale at first--hence the term "white gangrene"
sometimes applicable to the early appearances, which closely resemble
those presented by the limb of a corpse.
The extent of the gangrene depends upon the site of impaction of the
embolus, thus if the _abdominal aorta_ becomes suddenly occluded by an
ligaments. When gangrene follows occlusion of the _external iliac_ or of
the _femoral artery_ above the origin of its deep branch, the death of
the limb extends as high as the middle or upper third of the thigh. When
through the profunda is sufficient to maintain the vascular supply, and
gangrene does not necessarily follow. The rupture of a popliteal
aneurysm, however, by compressing the vein and the articular branches,
_bifurcation of the popliteal_, if gangrene ensues it usually spreads
well up the leg.
When the _axillary artery_ is the seat of embolic impaction, and
gangrene ensues, the process usually reaches the middle of the upper
arm. Gangrene following the blocking of the _brachial_ at its
middle thirds of the forearm.
Gangrene due to thrombosis or embolism is sometimes met with in patients
recovering from typhus, typhoid, or other fevers, such as that
associated with child-bed. It occurs in peripheral parts, such as the
toes, fingers, nose, or ears.
that for the senile form. Success has followed opening the artery and
removing the embolus. The artery is exposed at the seat of impaction
and, having been clamped above and below, a longitudinal opening is made
measured nearly 34 inches); the wound in the artery is then sewn up with
fine silk soaked in paraffin. When amputation is indicated, it must be
performed sufficiently high to ensure a free vascular supply to the
artery in its continuity--for example, in the treatment of aneurysm--the
limb may for some days remain in a condition verging on gangrene, the
distal parts being cold, devoid of sensation, and powerless. As the
gradually restored and these symptoms pass off. In some cases,
to be of the dry type. The occlusion of the vein as well as the artery
is not found to increase the risk of gangrene.
#Gangrene from Mechanical Constriction of the Vessels of the part.#--The
application of a bandage or plaster-of-Paris case too tightly, or of a
part beyond; but such cases are rare, as are also those due to the
When gangrene occurs from such causes, it tends to be of the moist type.
Much commoner is it to meet with localised areas of necrosis due to the
the dorsum of the foot. This is especially liable to occur when the
nutrition of the skin is depressed by any interference with its
nerve-supply, such as follows injuries to the spine or peripheral
nerves, disease of the brain, or acute anterior poliomyelitis. When the
from infection, the clinical course is that of dry gangrene.
Bed-sores, which are closely allied to pressure sores, will be described
at the end of this chapter.
When a localised portion of tissue, for example, a piece of skin, is so
its structure destroyed, it dies, and, if not infected with bacteria,
dries up, and the shrivelled brown skin is slowly separated by the
Fingers, toes, or even considerable portions of limbs may in the same
If organisms gain access, typical moist gangrene may ensue, or changes
dressings.
left after the separation of the dead skin may be allowed to heal by
or a limb it is not necessary to wait until spontaneous separation takes
place, as this is often a slow process. When a well-marked line of
demarcation has formed, amputation may be performed just sufficiently
The end of a stump, after spontaneous separation of the gangrenous
portion, requires to be trimmed, sufficient bone being removed to permit
delay, and at a higher level.
#scalds# may be followed by necrosis of tissue. So long as the parts are
kept absolutely dry--as, for example, by the picric acid method of
treatment--the grossly damaged portions of tissue undergo dry gangrene;
moist gangrene follows.
acid, may also induce local tissue necrosis, the general appearances of
the lesions produced being like those of severe burns. The resulting
are long of healing.
solution, is liable to induce dry gangrene when applied as a fomentation
to a finger, especially in women and children. Thrombosis occurs in the
becomes dark and leathery. On account of the anaesthetic action of
dead part separates very slowly.
the third degree of chilblain and the milder forms of true frost-bite;
toes and fingers--especially the great toe and the little finger--the
ears, and the nose. In this country it is seldom seen except in members
of the tramp class, who, in addition to being exposed to cold by
sleeping in the open air, are ill-fed and generally debilitated. The
condition usually manifests itself after the parts, having been
subjected to extreme cold, are brought into warm surroundings. The first
symptom is numbness in the part, followed by a sense of weight,
tingling, and finally by complete loss of sensation. The part attacked
becomes discoloured and swollen, and finally contracts and shrivels.
Above the dead area the limb may be the seat of excruciating pain. The
formation of a line of demarcation.
To prevent the occurrence of gangrene from frost-bite it is necessary to
cold room, and the part rubbed with snow, or put in a cold bath, and
warmer. Elevation of the part, wrapping it in cotton wool, and removal
to a warmer room, are then permissible, and stimulants and warm drinks
gangrene is averted, recovery ensues, its onset being indicated by the
A condition known as _Trench feet_ was widely prevalent amongst the
troops in France during the European War. Although allied to frost-bite,
cold appears to play a less important part in its causation than
humidity and constriction of the limbs producing ischaemia of the feet.
Changes were found in the endothelium of the blood vessels, the axis
civil life.
over fifty years of age who suffer from glycosuria. The arteries are
is unsuspected before the onset of the gangrene, and it is only on
embolism, and, like senile gangrene, which it may closely simulate in
its early stages, it not infrequently begins after a slight injury to
one of the toes. It but rarely, however, assumes the dry, shrivelling
type, as a rule being attended with swelling, oedema, and dusky redness
of the foot, and severe pain. According to Paget, the dead part remains
warm longer than in other forms of senile gangrene; there is a greater
tendency for patches of skin at some distance from the primary seat of
upwards in the subcutaneous planes, leaving the overlying skin
of the moist type and spreads rapidly.
The rules for amputation are the same as those governing the treatment
of senile gangrene, the level at which the limb is removed depending
upon whether the gangrene is of the dry or moist type. The general
treatment for diabetes must, of course, be employed whether amputation
should not be so rigid as in uncomplicated diabetes, and that opium
The _prognosis_ even after amputation is unfavourable. In many cases the
operation; or, if he survives this, he may eventually succumb to
from toxaemia. Occasionally the other limb becomes gangrenous. On the
other hand, the glycosuria may diminish or may even disappear after
#Gangrene associated with Spasm of Blood Vessels.#--#Raynaud's Disease#,
women, between the ages of eighteen and thirty, who are the subjects of
uterine disorders, anaemia, or chlorosis. Cold is an aggravating factor,
as the disease is commonest during the winter months. The digits of both
disease seldom spreads beyond the phalanges or deeper than the skin.
The first evidence is that the fingers become cold, white, and
insensitive to touch and pain. These attacks of _local syncope_ recur at
and painful.
circulation through the fingers becomes exceedingly sluggish, and the
parts assume a dull, livid hue. There is swelling and burning or
shooting pain. This may pass off in a few days, or may increase in
severity, with the formation of bullae, and end in dry gangrene. As a
rule, the slough which forms is comparatively small and superficial,
but it may take some months to separate. The condition tends to recur in
successive winters.
wool, and in the use of hot-air or electric baths, the parts being
gangrene occurs, it is treated on the same lines as other forms of dry
removing the dead part.
#Angio-sclerotic Gangrene.#--A form of gangrene due to _angio-sclerosis_
is occasionally met with in young persons, even in children. It bears
certain analogies to Raynaud's disease in that spasm of the vessels
The main arteries are narrowed by hyperplastic endarteritis followed by
thrombosis, and similar changes are found in the veins. The condition is
The patient is liable to sudden attacks of numbness, tingling and
claudication_. During these attacks the large arteries--femoral,
with great pain and runs a slow course. It is treated on the same lines
#Gangrene from Ergot.#--Gangrene may occur from interference with blood
and pains in the parts to be affected, and is of the dry variety.
In this country it is usually met with in sailors off foreign ships,
whose dietary largely consists of rye bread. Trivial injuries may be the
starting-point, the anaesthesia produced by the ergotin preventing the
patient taking notice of them. Alcoholism is a potent predisposing
cause.
advisable to wait for the formation of a line of demarcation before
operating, and then to amputate immediately above the dead part.
BACTERIAL VARIETIES OF GANGRENE
first, and, spreading rapidly, result in extensive necrosis of tissue,
and often end fatally.
The infection is usually a mixed one in which anaerobic bacteria
predominate. The anaerobe most constantly present is the _bacillus
sometimes with pyogenic diplo- and streptococci. According to the mode of
action of the associated organisms and the combined effects of their
toxins on the tissues, the gangrenous process presents different
pathological and clinical features. Some combinations, for example,
result in a rapidly spreading cellulitis with early necrosis of
connective tissue accompanied by thrombosis throughout the capillary and
venous circulation of the parts implicated; other combinations cause
in the tissues, particularly in the muscles.
These different effects do not appear to be due to a specific action of
any one of the organisms present, but to the combined effect of a
gangrene may be separately described, but it must be clearly understood
that they frequently overlap and cannot always be distinguished from one
is the form most commonly met with in civil practice. It may follow such
cellulitis rapidly giving place to those of a spreading gangrene. Or it
may ensue on a severe railway, machinery, or street accident, when
lacerated and bruised tissues are contaminated with gross dirt. Often
within a few hours of the injury the whole part rapidly becomes painful,
swollen, oedematous, and tense. The skin is at first glazed, and perhaps
paler than normal, but soon assumes a dull red or purplish hue, and
tissues, and their presence is indicated by emphysematous crackling when
the part is handled. The spread of the disease is so rapid that its
occurrence of red lines along the course of the lymphatics of the limb.
rapidly that the local changes indicative of gangrene have not time to
[Illustration: FIG. 22.--Gangrene of Terminal Phalanx of Index-Finger,
following cellulitis of hand resulting from a scratch on the palm of the
hand.]
Rigors may occur, but the temperature is not necessarily raised--indeed,
subject can outlive.
contaminated by earth, street dust, stable refuse, or other forms of
gross dirt. Devitalised and contaminated tissue is removed with the
chlorine group or with hydrogen peroxide. If there is a reasonable
sutured, but if this is doubtful it is left open and packed or
irrigated.
When acute gangrene has set in no treatment short of amputation is of
saving the patient. The limb must be amputated well beyond the apparent
wound. An assistant or nurse, who is to take no other part in the
operation, is told off to carry out the preliminary purification, and to
hold the limb during the operation.
#Malignant Oedema.#--This form of acute gangrene has been defined as
"a spreading inflammatory oedema attended with emphysema, and ultimately
organism is the _bacillus of malignant oedema_ or _vibrion septique_ of
substances. It is anaerobic, and occurs as long, thick rods with
which have a high power of resistance, form in the centre of the rods,
specific bacillus in its action.
At the bedside it is difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish it
from acute infective gangrene. Both follow on the same kinds of injury
incidence of the disease is mainly on the superficial parts, which
become oedematous and emphysematous, and acquire a marbled appearance
with the veins clearly outlined. Early disappearance of sensation is a
particularly grave symptom. Bullae form on the skin, and the tissues
have "a peculiar heavy but not putrid odour." The constitutional effects
are extremely severe, and death may ensue within a few hours.
#Acute Emphysematous# or #Gas Gangrene# was prevalent in certain areas
at various periods during the European War. It follows infection of
lacerated wounds with the _bacillus aerogenes capsulatus_, usually in
combination with other anaerobes, and its main incidence is on the
muscles, which rapidly become infiltrated with gas that spreads
toxaemia is profound, and the face and lips assume a characteristic
cyanosis. The condition is attended with a high mortality. Only in the
early stages and when the infection is limited are local measures
#Cancrum Oris# or #Noma#.--This disease is believed to be due to a
specific bacillus, which occurs in long delicate rods, and is chiefly
found at the margin of the gangrenous area. It is prone to attack
begins as an ulcerative stomatitis, more especially affecting the gums
or inner aspect of the cheek. The child lies prostrated, and from the
open mouth foul-smelling saliva, streaked with blood, escapes; the face
is of an ashy-grey colour, the lips dark and swollen. On the inner
aspect of the cheek is a deeply ulcerated surface, with sloughy shreds
of dark-brown or black tissue covering its base; the edges are
infiltrated and oedematous. In the course of a few hours a dark spot
dark-red area which extends over the cheek (Fig. 23). The tissue
separates, the cheek is perforated.
Meanwhile the process spreads inside the mouth, and the gums, the floor
out. The constitutional disturbance is severe, the temperature raised,
and the pulse feeble and rapid.
The extremely foetid odour which pervades the room or even the house the
patient occupies, is usually sufficient to suggest the diagnosis of
cancrum oris. The odour must not be mistaken for that due to
decomposition of sordes on the teeth and gums of a debilitated patient.
(From a photograph lent by Sir George T. Beatson.)]
_Treatment._--The only satisfactory treatment is thorough removal under
which the organisms are active. This is most efficiently accomplished by
the knife or scissors, cutting until the tissue bleeds freely, after
which the raw surface is painted with undiluted carbolic acid and
with a disinfectant and deodorant lotion, such as Condy's fluid. The
great as might be expected, and can be further diminished by plastic
has occurred.
BED-SORES
or in those whose tissues are devitalised by acute or chronic diseases
interference with the nerve-supply of the skin, whether from injury or
disease of the central nervous system or of the peripheral nerves,
excessive pressure over a bony prominence, especially if the parts be
bed-sores, sometimes form where two skin surfaces remain constantly
mammae, or between fingers or toes confined in a splint.
[Illustration: FIG. 24.--Acute Bed-Sores over Right Buttock.]
and the chronic bed-sore.
The _acute_ bed-sore usually occurs over the sacrum or buttock. It
In advanced cases of general paralysis of the insane, a peculiar form of
acute bed-sore beginning as a blister, and passing on to the formation
of a black, dry eschar, which slowly separates, occurs on such parts as
oedematous, and a blister may form. This bursts and exposes the papillae
of the skin, which are of a greenish hue. A tough greyish-black slough
forms, and is slowly separated. It is not uncommon for the gangrenous
area to continue to spread both in width and in depth till it reaches
the periosteum or bone. Bed-sores over the sacrum sometimes implicate
the vertebral canal and lead to spinal meningitis, which usually proves
fatal.
a bed-sore often proves a serious complication of other surgical
conditions. From this cause, for example, old people may succumb during
the treatment of a fractured thigh.
The granulating surface left on the separation of the slough tends to
heal comparatively rapidly.
_Prevention of Bed-sores._--The first essential in the prevention of
time. Ring-pads of wool, air-cushions, or water-beds are necessary to
remove pressure from prominent parts. Absolute dryness of the skin is
all-important. At least once a day, the sacrum, buttocks,
pressure, must be sponged with soap and water, thoroughly dried, and
then rubbed with methylated spirit, which is allowed to dry on the skin.
Dusting the part with boracic acid powder not only keeps it dry, but
prevents the development of bacteria in the skin secretions.
In operation cases, care must be taken that irritating chemicals used to
purify the skin do not collect under the patient and remain in contact
operating-table. There is reason to believe that the so-called
has been known to follow soiling of the sheets by the escape of a
turpentine enema.
dry absorbent dressings are applied and frequently changed. It is
boracic poultices, eucalyptus ointment, or balsam of Peru, to facilitate
the raw surface scraped, and then painted with iodine.
CHAPTER VII
BACTERIAL AND OTHER WOUND INFECTIONS
_Erysipelas_--_Diphtheria_--_Tetanus_--_Hydrophobia_--_Anthrax_--
ERYSIPELAS
Erysipelas, popularly known as "rose," is an acute spreading infective
disease of the skin or of a mucous membrane due to the action of a
streptococcus. Infection invariably takes place through an abrasion of
the surface, although this may be so slight that it escapes observation
even when sought for. The streptococci are found most abundantly in the
region of the mouth or nose, or from an operation wound in this area.
From this point of origin the inflammation may spread all over the face
chin, and never extends on to the front of the neck. There is great
oedema of the face, the eyes becoming closed up, and the features
unrecognisable. The inflammation may spread to the meninges, the
intracranial venous sinuses, the eye, or the ear. In some cases the
erysipelas invades the mucous membrane of the mouth, and spreads to the
fauces and larynx, setting up an oedema of the glottis which may prove
fifteen to sixty hours, the patient complains of headache, pains in the
rule, the bowels are constipated. There is frequently albuminuria, and
occasionally nocturnal delirium. A moderate degree of leucocytosis
(15,000 to 20,000) is usually present.
from a bright scarlet to a dull brick-red. The edges are slightly raised
skin is smooth, tense, and glossy, and presents here and there blisters
inch beyond the red margin.
[Illustration: FIG. 25.--Chart of Erysipelas occurring in a wound.]
The disease tends to spread spasmodically and irregularly, and the
direction and extent of its progress may be recognised by mapping out
the peripheral zone of tenderness. Red streaks appear along the lines of
the superficial lymph vessels, and the deep lymphatics may sometimes be
palpated as firm, tender cords. The neighbouring glands, also, are
generally enlarged and tender.
The disease lasts for from two or three days to as many weeks, and
the disease may prove fatal from absorption of toxins, involvement of
the brain or meninges, or from general streptococcal infection.
#Complications.#--_Diffuse suppurative cellulitis_ is the most serious
local complication, and results from a mixed infection with other
during the convalescent stage. They are doubtless due to the action of
skin bacteria, which attack the tissues devitalised by the erysipelas. A
erysipelas, especially when they affect the face or the lower extremity,
a condition which is referred to with elephantiasis.
of the process. We have found that by painting with linimentum iodi, a
ring half an inch broad, about an inch in front of the peripheral tender
zone--not the red margin--an artificial leucocytosis is produced, and
several days, even although the erysipelas has not overstepped the ring.
Success depends upon using the liniment of iodine (the tincture is not
strong enough), and in applying it well in front of the disease. To
in 6), or lead and opium fomentations.
administrating quinine in small--two-grain--doses every four hours, or
salicylate of iron (2-5 gr. every three hours), and in giving plenty of
fluid nourishment. It is worthy of note that the anti-streptococcic
serum has proved of less value in the treatment of erysipelas than might
have been expected, probably because the serum is not made from the
proper strain of streptococcus.
It is not necessary to isolate cases of erysipelas, provided the usual
DIPHTHERIA
Diphtheria is an acute infective disease due to the action of a specific
disease is usually transmitted from one patient to another, but it may
incubation period varies from two to seven days.
#Clinical Features.#--In _pharyngeal diphtheria_, on the first or
appear. These rapidly increase in area and thickness, till they coalesce
and form a complete covering to the parts. In the pharynx the false
membrane is less adherent to the surface than it is when the disease
affects the air-passages. The diphtheritic process may spread from the
profuse ichorous discharge from the nostrils, and sometimes severe
conjunctiva. The middle ear also may become involved by spread along the
auditory (Eustachian) tube.
accent. He becomes weak and anaemic, and loses his appetite. There is
injection of antitoxin; after the injection there is usually a
diminution in the number of leucocytes. The false membrane may separate
and be cast off, after which the patient gradually recovers. Death may
as a rule, it spreads thence from the pharynx. It first manifests itself
it begins, it rapidly gets worse. Inspiration becomes noisy, sometimes
stridulous or metallic or sibilant, and there is marked indrawing of the
epigastrium and lower intercostal spaces. The hoarseness becomes more
marked, the cough more severe, and the patient restless. The difficulty
of breathing occurs in paroxysms, which gradually increase in frequency
After the acute symptoms have passed off, various localised
#Diagnosis.#--The finding of the Klebs-Loffler bacillus is the only
conclusive evidence of the disease. The bacillus may be obtained by
swabbing the throat with a piece of aseptic--not antiseptic--cotton wool
entangle portions of the false membrane or exudate. The swab thus
some water boiled in it, and sent to a laboratory for investigation. To
identify the bacillus a piece of the membrane from the swab is rubbed on
a cover glass, dried, and stained with methylene blue or other basic
stain; or cultures may be made on agar or other suitable medium. When a
bacteriological examination is impossible, or when the clinical features
exists as to the real nature of membranous croup and its relationship to
true diphtheria, that when the diagnosis between the two is uncertain
cleared up by demonstration of the bacillus.
#Treatment.#--An attempt may be made to destroy or to counteract the
organisms by swabbing the throat with strong antiseptic solutions, such
as 1 in 1000 corrosive sublimate or 1 in 30 carbolic acid, or by
spraying with peroxide of hydrogen.
The antitoxic serum is our sheet-anchor in the treatment of diphtheria,
and recourse should be had to its use as early as possible.
Difficulty of swallowing may be met by the use of a stomach tube passed
either through the mouth or nose. When this is impracticable, nutrient
enemata are called for.
In laryngeal diphtheria, the interference with respiration may call for
intubation of the larynx, or tracheotomy, but the antitoxin treatment
has greatly diminished the number of cases in which it becomes necessary
Intubation consists in introducing through the mouth into the larynx a
tube which allows the patient to breathe freely during the period while
with the apparatus of O'Dwyer; but when this instrument is not
available, a simple gum-elastic catheter with a terminal opening (as
suggested by Macewen and Annandale) may be employed.
called for if the patient's life is endangered by embarrassment of
reflex excitability, hypertonus, and spasm of one or more groups of
anaerobe, is widely distributed in nature and can be isolated from
garden earth, dung-heaps, and stable refuse. It is a slender rod-shaped
bacillus, with a single large spore at one end giving it the shape of a
producing tetanus, are highly resistant to chemical agents, retain their
accompanied by aerobic organisms, which, by using up the oxygen in the
tissues, provide for it a suitable environment. The presence of a
for all practical purposes a local one, the symptoms of the disease
fibres supplying the voluntary muscles. Its first effect on the motor
excited by mild stimuli, which under ordinary conditions would produce
no reaction. As the toxin accumulates the reflex arc is affected, with
the result that when a stimulus reaches the ganglia a motor discharge
the reflex apparatus of the whole cord. As the toxin spreads it causes
both motor hyper-tonus and hyper-excitability, which accounts for the
tonic contraction and the clonic spasms characteristic of tetanus.
#Clinical Varieties of Tetanus.#--_Acute_ or _Fulminating
Tetanus_.--This variety is characterised by the shortness of the
incubation period, the rapidity of its progress, the severity of its
symptoms, and its all but universally fatal issue in spite of
characteristic symptoms may appear within three or four days of the
infliction of the wound, but the incubation period may extend to three
weeks, and the wound may be quite healed before the disease declares
itself--_delayed tetanus_. Usually, however, the wound is inflamed and
suppurating, with ragged and sloughy edges. A slight feverish attack may
mark the onset of the tetanic condition, or the patient may feel
perfectly well until the spasms begin. If careful observations be made,
wound are the first to become contracted; but in the majority of
instances the patient's first complaint is of pain and stiffness in the
muscles of mastication, notably the masseter, so that he has difficulty
in opening the mouth--hence the popular name "lock-jaw." The muscles of
expression soon share in the rigidity, and the face assumes a taut,
The next muscles to become stiff and painful are those of the neck,
especially the sterno-mastoid and trapezius. The patient is inclined to
attribute the pain and stiffness to exposure to cold or rheumatism. At
an early stage the diaphragm and the muscles of the anterior abdominal
wall become contracted; later the muscles of the back and thorax are
involved; and lastly those of the limbs. Although this is the typical
To this permanent tonic contraction of the muscles there are soon added
clonic spasms. These spasms are at first slight and transient, with
The distribution of the spasms varies in different cases: in some it is
confined to particular groups of muscles, such as those of the neck,
is raised from the bed, sometimes to such an extent that the patient
side--_pleurosthotonos_--is not uncommon, the arching usually taking
frequently the body is bent forward so that the knees and chin almost
When the thoracic muscles, including the diaphragm, are thrown into
be so severe as to rupture muscles or even to fracture one of the long
As time goes on, the clonic exacerbations become more and more frequent,
whisper in the room, a noise in the street, a draught of cold air, the
effort to swallow, a question addressed to the patient or his attempt to
answer, is sufficient to determine an attack. The movements are so
forcible and so continuous that the nurse has great difficulty in
keeping the bedclothes on the patient, or even in keeping him in bed.
The general condition of the patient is pitiful in the extreme. He is
fully conscious of the gravity of the disease, and his mind remains
muscles keeps him in a constant state of fearful apprehension of the
normal throughout. Shortly before death very high temperatures (110 o F.)
have been recorded, and it has been observed that the thermometer
during the spasms, and may become exceedingly rapid and feeble before
death, probably from paralysis of the vagus. Sudden death from cardiac
The respiration is affected in so far as the spasms of the respiratory
adds to the horrors of the disease.
One of the most constant symptoms is a copious perspiration, the patient
but as a rule is normal in composition; as in other acute infective
conditions, albumen and blood may be present. Retention of urine may
the catheter.
The fits may cease some time before death, or, on the other hand, death
poisoning_, for example, the spasms come on immediately after the
patient has taken a toxic dose of the drug; they are clonic in
character, but the muscles are relaxed between the fits. If the dose is
are clonic in character, affect chiefly the muscles of respiration and
deglutition, and pass off entirely in the intervals between attacks.
Certain cases of _haemorrhage into the lateral ventricles_ of the brain
also simulate tetanus, but an analysis of the symptoms will prevent
errors in diagnosis. _Cerebro-spinal meningitis_ and _basal meningitis_
of tetanus, but there is little difficulty in distinguishing between
these diseases. Lastly, in the _tetany_ of children, or that following
operations on the thyreoid gland, the spasms are of a jerking character,
#Chronic Tetanus.#--The difference between this and acute tetanus is
and insidious in its progress, and it never reaches the same degree of
severity. Trismus is the most marked and constant form of spasm; and
escape. Every additional day the patient lives adds to the probability
duration is from six to ten weeks.
developed many weeks or even months after a patient had been injured,
some secondary operation, _e.g._, for the removal of a foreign body, or
the breaking down of adhesions, which aroused latent organisms.
the hypertonus and spasms are localised to the muscles in the vicinity
probably neutralised by the antibodies in circulation, while those
When it occurs in the _limbs_, attention is usually directed to the fact
by pain accompanying the spasms; the muscles are found to be hard and
there are frequent twitchings of the limb. A characteristic reflex is
present in the lower extremity, namely, extension of the foot and leg
when the sole is tickled.
the distribution of the facial nerve. It is characterised by the
occurrence on the same side as the injury, of facial spasm, rapidly
followed by more or less complete paralysis of the muscles of
expression, with unilateral trismus and difficulty in swallowing. Other
cranial nerves, particularly the oculomotor and the hypoglossal, may
although the muscles are irresponsive to ordinary physiological stimuli,
they are thrown into spasm by the abnormal impulses of tetanus.
_Trismus._--This term is used to denote a form of tetanic spasm limited
to the muscles of mastication. It is really a mild form of chronic
the fixation of the jaw sometimes associated with a wisdom-tooth
_Tetanus neonatorum_ is a form of tetanus occurring in infants of about
invariably fatal within a few days.
tetanus. The sooner the serum is given after the injury, the more
subcutaneously is sufficient for the initial dose; if a longer period
has elapsed, 2000 to 3000 units should be given intra-muscularly, as
The wound must be purified in the usual way, and all instruments and
sterilised by prolonged boiling.
_Treatment._--When tetanus has developed the main indications are to
prevent the further production of toxins in the wound, and to neutralise
those that have been absorbed into the nervous system. Thorough
drainage of the wound are first carried out. To arrest the absorption of
daily into the muscles of the affected limb, or directly into the nerve
towards the spinal cord.
units should be injected intra-thecally daily for four or five days, the
foot of the bed being raised to enable the serum to reach the upper
parts of the cord.
The quantity of toxin circulating in the blood is so small as to be
practically negligible, and the risk of anaphylactic shock attending
procedure.
Baccelli recommends the injection of 20 c.c. of a 1 in 100 solution of
efficiency of this treatment. The intra-thecal injection of 10 c.c. of a
15 per cent. solution of magnesium sulphate has proved beneficial in
curative effect.
To conserve the patient's strength by preventing or diminishing the
severity of the spasms, he should be placed in a quiet room, and every
form of disturbance avoided. Sedatives, such as bromides, paraldehyde,
or opium, must be given in large doses. Chloral is perhaps the best, and
of the patient, by abolishing the spasms, and enabling the attendants to
administer nourishment or drugs either through a stomach tube or by the
or cat. The virus appears to be communicated through the saliva of the
animal, and to show a marked affinity for nerve tissues; and the disease
A dog which has bitten a person should on no account be killed until its
condition has been proved one way or the other. Should rabies develop
and its destruction become necessary, the head and spinal cord should be
anxiety to the person bitten and to his friends would be avoided if
these rules were observed, because in many cases it will be shown that
present, the patient should be submitted to the Pasteur treatment.
rabies. The incubation period averages about forty days, but varies from
a fortnight to seven or eight months, and is shorter in young than in
old persons. The original wound has long since healed, and beyond a
breathing "resembling what often occurs when a person goes into a cold
accompanied by a loud-sounding hiccough, likened by the laity to the
barking of a dog. Difficulty in swallowing fluids may be the first
symptom.
swallowing, but has a constant sense of impending suffocation. To add to
his distress, a copious secretion of viscid saliva fills his mouth. Any
voluntary effort, as well as all forms of external stimuli, only serve
to aggravate the spasms which are always induced by the attempt to
swallow fluid, or even by the sound of running water.
The temperature is raised; the pulse is small, rapid, and intermittent;
The mind may remain clear to the end, or the patient may have delusions,
supposing himself to be surrounded by terrifying forms. There is always
extreme mental agitation and despair, and the sufferer is in constant
fear of his impending fate. Happily the inevitable issue is not long
delayed, death usually occurring in from two to four days from the
no difficulty in diagnosis. The only condition with which it is liable
of deglutition are specially involved--the so-called tetanus
hydrophobicus.
_Prophylaxis._--The bite of an animal suspected of being rabid should be
cauterised at once by means of the actual or Paquelin cautery, or by a
strong chemical escharotic such as pure carbolic acid, after which
antiseptic dressings are applied.
for our best hope of averting the onset of symptoms. "It may now be
taken as established that a grave responsibility rests on those
concerned if a person bitten by a mad animal is not subjected to the
disease admits of the patient being inoculated with a modified virus
producing a mild attack, which protects him from the natural disease.
sources of irritation. The spasms may be diminished by means of chloral
and bromides, or by chloroform inhalation.
ANTHRAX
Anthrax is a comparatively rare disease, communicable to man from
other herbivora. In animals it is characterised by symptoms of acute
fever."
bacteria, occurs in groups or in chains made up of numerous bacilli,
each bacillus measuring from 6 to 8 u in length. The organisms are found
in enormous numbers throughout the bodies of animals that have died of
to the process. In the spore-free condition, the organisms are readily
destroyed by ordinary germicides, and by the gastric juice. The spores,
on the other hand, have a high degree of resistance. Not only do they
remain viable in the dry state for long periods, even up to a year, but
at 140 o C. for several hours before they are destroyed.
[Illustration: FIG. 27.--Bacillus of Anthrax in section of skin, from a
_Clinical Varieties of Anthrax._--In man, anthrax may manifest itself in
one of three clinical forms.
It may be transmitted by means of spores or bacilli directly from a
the use of a shaving-brush contaminated by spores. The path of infection
is usually through an abrasion of the skin, and the primary
manifestations are local, constituting what is known as _the malignant
In other cases the disease is contracted through the inhalation of the
pneumonia of great virulence ensues. This affection is known as
_wool-sorter's disease_, and is almost universally fatal.
of spores ingested into the alimentary canal in meat or milk derived
#Clinical Features of Malignant Pustule.#--We shall here confine
ourselves to the consideration of the local lesion as it occurs in the
skin--_the malignant pustule_.
The point of infection is usually on an uncovered part of the body, such
as the face, hands, arms, or back of the neck, and the wound may be
exceedingly minute. After an incubation period varying from a few hours
to several days, a reddish nodule resembling a small boil appears at the
seat of inoculation, the immediately surrounding skin becomes swollen
and indurated, and over the indurated area there appear a number of
becomes blood-stained (Fig. 28). Coincidently the subcutaneous tissue
skin red and tense. Within a few hours, blood is extravasated in the
centre of the indurated area, the blisters burst, and a dark brown or
part is hot and itchy, but the patient does not complain of great pain.
nausea, and sometimes shivering.
If the infection becomes generalised--_anthracaemia_--the temperature
signs of severe blood-poisoning appear: vomiting, diarrhoea, pains in the
limbs, headache and delirium, and the condition proves fatal in from
_Differential Diagnosis._--When the malignant pustule is fully
developed, the central slough with the surrounding vesicles and the
adjacent lymph vessels and glands. The occupation of the patient may
suggest the possibility of anthrax infection.
[Illustration: FIG. 28.--Malignant Pustule, third day after infection
(cf. Fig. 29).]
largely disappeared. Treated by Sclavo's serum (cf. Fig. 28).]
should at once be cauterised with caustic potash, the actual cautery, or
pure carbolic acid.
effects are manifest in a few hours. Favourable results have also
By some it is recommended that the local lesion should be freely
excised; others advocate cauterisation of the affected part with solid
excellent results by the latter method in a large series of cases, the
oedema subsiding in about twenty-four hours and the constitutional
symptoms rapidly improving. Wolff and Wiewiorowski, on the other hand,
have had equally good results by simply protecting the local lesion with
also been employed with apparent benefit.
GLANDERS
mallei_, which resembles the tubercle bacillus, save that it is somewhat
higher temperatures for its cultivation than the tubercle bacillus, and
its growth on potato is of a characteristic chocolate-brown colour, with
a greenish-yellow ring at the margin of the growth. The bacillus mallei
retains its vitality for long periods under ordinary conditions, but is
readily killed by heat and chemical agents. It does not form spores.
gives rise to two distinct types of disease--_acute glanders_, and
_chronic glanders_ or _farcy_.
equine animals, horned cattle being immune. It affects the septum of the
nose and adjacent parts, firm, translucent, greyish nodules containing
ulcers, which are attended with profuse discharge, and marked
spleen, and liver, may be the seat of secondary nodules.
_In man_, acute glanders is commoner than the chronic variety. Infection
always takes place through an abraded surface, and usually on one of the
or face; or on the mucous membrane of the mouth, nose, or eye. The
incubation period is from three to five days.
infected wound, with inflammatory redness around it and along the lines
nodules appear, and are rapidly transformed into pustules. These may
occur on the face and in the vicinity of joints, and may be mistaken for
After breaking down, these pustules give rise to irregular ulcers, which
nasal mucous membrane becomes affected, and produces a discharge--at
first watery, but later sanious and purulent. Necrosis of the bones of
offensive. In nearly every case metastatic abscesses form in different
parts of the body, such as the lungs, joints, or muscles.
During the development of the disease the patient feels ill, complains
of headache and pains in the limbs, the temperature rises to 104 o or
even to 106 o F., and assumes a pyaemic type. The pulse becomes rapid and
weak. The tongue is dry and brown. There is profuse sweating,
_Differential Diagnosis._--There is nothing characteristic in the site
of the primary lesion in man, and the condition may, during the early
inflammatory condition. Later, the disease may simulate acute articular
pyaemia. The diagnosis is established by the recognition of the bacillus.
Veterinary surgeons attach great importance to the mallein test as a
should be carried out, provided the condition is sufficiently limited to
render complete removal practicable.
When secondary abscesses form in accessible situations, they must be
incised, disinfected, and drained. The general treatment is carried out
on the same lines as in other acute infective diseases.
#Chronic Glanders.#--_In the horse_ the chronic form of glanders is
known as _farcy_, and follows infection through an abrasion of the skin,
involving chiefly the superficial lymph vessels and glands. The
lymphatics become indurated and nodular, constituting what veterinarians
call _farcy pipes_ and _farcy buds_.
_In man_ also the clinical features of the chronic variety of the
disease are somewhat different from those of the acute form. Here, too,
infection takes place through a broken cutaneous surface, and leads to a
superficial lymphangitis with nodular thickening of the lymphatics
(_farcy buds_). The neighbouring glands soon become swollen and
indurated. The primary lesion meanwhile inflames, suppurates, and, after
ulcers are exceedingly intractable. Secondary deposits in the
subcutaneous tissue, the muscles, and other parts, are not uncommon, and
the nasal mucous membrane may become involved. The disease often runs a
chronic course, extending to four or five months, or even longer.
Recovery takes place in about 50 per cent. of cases, but the
The _differential diagnosis_ is often difficult, especially in the
bacillus. The ulcerated lesions of farcy have to be distinguished from
those of tubercle, syphilis, and other forms of infective granuloma.
_Treatment._--Limited areas of disease should be completely excised. The
Actinomycosis is a chronic disease due to the action of an organism
[Illustration: FIG. 30.--Section of Actinomycosis Colony in Pus from
_Etiology and Morbid Anatomy._--The actinomyces, which has never been
met with outside the body, gives rise in oxen, horses, and other animals
to tumour-like masses composed of granulation tissue; and in man to
chronic suppurative processes which may result in a condition resembling
pathogenic organisms, and occurs in the tissues in the form of small,
round, semi-translucent bodies, about the size of a pin-head or less,
are broken up so as to form masses or chains of _cocci_; and around the
periphery of the colony are elongated, pear-shaped, hyaline, _club-like
barley; and the organism has been found adhering to particles of grain
embedded in the tissues of animals suffering from the disease. In the
human subject there is often a history of exposure to infection from
Around each colony of actinomyces is a zone of granulation tissue in
which suppuration usually occurs, so that the fungus comes to lie in a
_Clinical features._--In man the disease may be met with in the skin,
the organisms gaining access through an abrasion, and spreading by the
formation of new nodules in the same way as tuberculosis.
The region of the mouth and jaws is one of the commonest sites of
of a carious tooth, and spreads to the lower jaw. A swelling is slowly
neck becomes infiltrated, the spread is more rapid. The whole region
becomes infiltrated and swollen, and the skin ultimately gives way and
characteristic greenish-grey or yellow granules are seen in the pus, and
when examined microscopically reveal the colonies of actinomyces.
Less frequently the maxilla becomes affected, and the disease may spread
to the base of the skull and brain. The vertebrae may become involved by
a condition simulating tuberculous disease of the spine. When it
implicates the intestinal canal and its accessory glands, the lungs,
pleura, and bronchial tubes, or the brain, the disease is not amenable
surgical actinomycosis are sarcoma, tubercle, and syphilis. In the early
stages the differential diagnosis is exceedingly difficult. In many
can be demonstrated.
The slow destruction of the affected tissue by suppuration, the absence
of pain, tenderness, and redness, simulate tuberculosis, but the absence
actinomycosis may closely simulate a periosteal sarcoma.
opposite side; finally implicated base of skull, and proved fatal.
The recognition of the fungus is the crucial point in diagnosis.
succumbs to superadded septic infection. When, from its situation, the
_Treatment._--The surgical treatment is early and free removal of the
cautery, and sponged over with pure carbolic acid. The cavity is packed
Success has attended the use of a vaccine prepared from cultures of the
iodides in large doses, or with intra-muscular injections of a 10 per
cent. solution of cacodylate of soda, have proved of benefit.
an organism resembling that of actinomycosis, but not identical with it.
with in India. Infection takes place through an abrasion of the skin,
and the disease usually occurs on the feet of adult males who work
patch, which becomes discoloured and permeated by black or yellow
suppuration, and numerous minute abscesses lined by granulation tissues
fish-roe, or black pigmented granules like gunpowder. Sinuses form, and
in the bones, and the disease gradually extends up the leg (Fig. 32).
disturbance. The disease runs a prolonged course, sometimes lasting for
to life is that of prolonged suppuration.
If the disease is localised, it may be removed by the knife or sharp
above the disease is the best line of treatment. Unlike actinomycosis,
College of Surgeons, Edinburgh.)]
DELHI BOIL.--_Synonyms_--Aleppo boil, Biskra button, Furunculus
Delhi boil is a chronic inflammatory disease, most commonly met with in
through water used for washing, or by the bites of insects.
_Clinical Features._--A red spot, resembling the mark of a mosquito
bite, appears on the affected part, and is attended with itching. After
weeks there develops a series of small yellowish-white spots, from which
serum exudes, and, drying, forms a thick scab. Under this scab the skin
ulcerates, leaving small oval sores with sharply bevelled edges, and an
number from one to forty or fifty. They may last for months and then
heal spontaneously, or may continue to spread until arrested by suitable
treatment. There is no enlargement of adjacent glands, and but little
The _treatment_ consists in destroying the original papule by the actual
cautery, acid nitrate of mercury, or pure carbolic acid. The ulcers
should be scraped with the sharp spoon, and cauterised.
CHIGOE.--Chigoe or jigger results from the introduction of the
eggs of the sand-flea (_Pulex penetrans_) into the tissues. It occurs in
their irritation they cause localised inflammation with pustules or
particularly about the toe-nails and on the scrotum. The treatment
consists in picking out the insect with a blunt needle, special care
being taken not to break it up. The puncture is then cauterised. The
mosquitoes, midges, different varieties of flies, wasps, and spiders,
may be followed by serious complications. The effects are mainly due to
has not been ascertained.
The local lesion is a puncture, surrounded by a zone of hyperaemia,
wheals, or vesicles, and is associated with burning sensations and
reproduces the local signs and symptoms. Where the connective tissue is
considerable swelling; and in the mouth and fauces this may lead to
such as ammonia water, solutions of carbonate or bicarbonate of soda, or
sal-volatile. Weak carbolic lotions, or lead and opium lotion, are
useful in allaying the local irritation. One of the best means of
neutralising the poison is to apply to the sting a drop of a mixture
SNAKE-BITES.--We are here only concerned with the injuries
inflicted by the venomous varieties of snakes, the most important of
While the virulence of these creatures varies widely, they are all
capable of producing in a greater or less degree symptoms of acute
attached to the upper jaw, and connected by a duct with poison-secreting
fluid, of acid reaction, probably of the nature of an albumose, and
The _clinical features_ resulting from the injection of the venom vary
when it immediately enters a large vein. The poison is innocuous when
adjacent vessels the seat of thrombosis. Immediately there is intense
The _general symptoms_ may come on at once if the snake is a
particularly venomous one, or not for some hours if less virulent. In
the majority of viper or adder bites the constitutional disturbance is
slight and transient, if it appears at all. Snake-bites in children are
dilate, the skin becomes moist with a clammy sweat, and nausea with
be present. The pulse becomes feeble and rapid, the respiratory nerve
forty-eight hours. If the patient survives for two days the prognosis is
favourable.
_Treatment._--A broad ligature should be tied tightly round the limb
above the seat of infection, to prevent the poison passing into the
general circulation, and bleeding from the wound should be encouraged.
oxidation.
The general treatment consists in free stimulation with whisky, brandy,
are particularly useful. The most rational treatment, when it is
available, is the use of the _antivenin_ introduced by Fraser and
Calmette.
    bovine tuberculosis--Action of the bacillus upon the
    of the disease--THE TUBERCULOUS ABSCESS--Contents and wall of the
    abscess--Tuberculous sinuses.
peritoneum, the intestine, the kidney, prostate and testis, and in the
skin and subcutaneous cellular tissue; it is seldom met with in the
breast or in muscles, and it rarely affects the ovary, the pancreas, the
_Tubercle bacilli_ vary widely in their virulence, and they are more
tenacious of life than the common pyogenic bacteria. In a dry state, for
example, they can retain their vitality for months; and they can also
survive immersion in water for prolonged periods. They resist the action
of the products of putrefaction for a considerable time, and are not
destroyed by digestive processes in the stomach and intestine. They may
be killed in a few minutes by boiling, or by exposure to steam under
lotion.
infective diseases that have already been described, tuberculosis rarely
however, this does occur, and in illustration of the fact may be cited
containing the sputum of her consumptive master; the wound subsequently
tuberculosis of the skin of the finger, known as _anatomical tubercle_.
to become infected. It is highly probable that the common form of
x 1000 diam. Z. Neilsen stain.]
In the vast majority of cases the tubercle bacillus gains entrance to
the body by way of the mucous surfaces, the organisms being either
subject, those swallowed, from cattle. Bacilli, whether inhaled or
swallowed, are especially apt to lodge about the pharynx and pass to the
cervical glands, and those within the cavity of the chest--particularly
the bronchial glands at the root of the lung. From these, infection
extends at any later period in life to the bones, joints, and internal
There is reason to believe that the organisms may lie in a dormant
active in this way, the tuberculous tissue undergoes softening and
disintegration, and the infective material, by bursting into an adjacent
possessing in their bronchial glands, or elsewhere, an internal store of
origin, and from which similar outbreaks of tuberculosis may originate
in the future.
_The alimentary mucous membrane_, especially that of the lower ileum and
caecum, is exposed to infection by swallowed sputum and by food
materials, such as milk, containing tubercle bacilli. The organisms may
lodge in the mucous membrane and cause tuberculous ulceration, or they
which they pass to the mesenteric glands where they become arrested and
give rise to tuberculous disease.
is to be looked upon as determining the _localisation_ of the
circulating and reaching every tissue and organ of the body, the
occurrence of tuberculous disease in a particular part may be determined
aggravates tuberculous disease of a joint; also that an injury may light
up a focus that has been long quiescent, but we do not agree with
those--Da Costa, for example--who maintain that injury may be a
academic interest, but one that may raise important issues in the law
courts.
#Human and Bovine Tuberculosis.#--The frequency of the bovine bacillus
in the abdominal and in the glandular and osseous tuberculous lesions of
transmissible from the ox to the human subject, and that the milk of
tuberculous cows is probably a common vehicle of transmission.
#Changes in the Tissues following upon the successful Lodgment of
Tubercle Bacilli.#--The action of the bacilli on the tissues results in
the formation of granulation tissue comprising characteristic tissue
elements and with a marked tendency to undergo caseation.
caseation, is usually sufficient evidence of the tuberculous nature of
disease, the relation between them and the tissues remains one of mutual
antagonism; which of them is to gain and keep the upper hand in the
conflict depends on their relative powers of resistance.
immediate vicinity of the area of infection young connective tissue, and
later, fibrous tissue, is formed. This may replace the tuberculous
tissue and bring about repair--a fibrous cicatrix remaining to mark the
scene of the previous contest. Scars of this nature are frequently
discovered at the apex of the lung after death in persons who have at
permanent one, for at any subsequent period, if the part affected is
and there results a relapse or recrudescence of the disease. This
_tendency to relapse_ after apparent cure is a notable feature of
hip-joint, and it necessitates a prolonged course of treatment to give
the best chance of a lasting cure.
If, however, at the inauguration of the tuberculous disease the bacilli
prevail, the infection tends to spread into the tissues surrounding
tissue is formed. Finally the tuberculous tissue breaks down and
liquefies, resulting in the formation of a cold abscess. In their
struggle with the tissues, tubercle bacilli receive considerable support
and assistance from any pyogenic organisms that may be present. A
tuberculous infection may exhibit its aggressive qualities in a more
by the lymphatics to the nearest glands, or by the blood-stream to more
distant, and it may be to all, parts of the body. When the infection is
the individual tissues and organs, as they vary widely according to the
situation of the lesion.
infection. Within recent years the value of the "open-air" treatment has
of patient, whose home surroundings tend to favour the progress of the
of the possible discomforts and gastric disturbance which may attend a
sea-voyage, this should be recommended to patients suffering from
tuberculous lesions with more caution than has hitherto been exercised.
The diet must be a liberal one, and should include those articles which
are at the same time easily digested and nourishing, especially proteids
insufficient, it may be supplemented by such articles as malt extract,
tuberculous patients show an aversion to fat.
For _the use of tuberculin in diagnosis_ and for _the vaccine treatment
important to enable the fluids of the body, so altered, to come into
contact with the tuberculous focus. One of the obstacles to this is that
almost entirely deprived of bactericidal substances. In the case of
of this inert material is necessary before the tissues can be irrigated
with fluids of high bactericidal value. Again, in tuberculous ascites
the abdominal cavity is filled with a fluid practically devoid of
work their will on the tissues. When the stagnant fluid is got rid of by
laparotomy, the parts are immediately douched with lymph charged with
protective substances, the bactericidal power of which may be many times
that of the fluid displaced.
It is probable that the beneficial influence of _counter-irritants_,
_Artificial Hyperaemia._--As has been explained, the induction of
efficient means of combating bacterial infection. The treatment of
lymphocytes.
The constricting bandage should be applied at some distance above the
above the elbow, and it must not cause pain either where it is applied
or in the diseased part. The bandage is only applied for a few hours
each day, either two hours at a time or twice a day for one hour, and,
while it is on, all dressings are removed save a piece of sterile gauze
over any wound or sinus that may be present. The process of cure takes a
affection.
In cases in which a constricting bandage is inapplicable, for example,
in cold abscesses, tuberculous glands or tendon sheaths, Klapp's suction
bell is employed. The cup is applied for five minutes at a time and then
about three-quarters of an hour. The pus is allowed to escape by a small
It has been found that tuberculous lesions tend to undergo cure
number of cases of tuberculosis requiring operative interference has
operation is required; for example, in disease of the lymph glands for
the removal of sequestra, or in disease of joints to improve the
function of the limb. It is to be understood, however, that operative
treatment must always be preceded by and combined with other therapeutic
measures.
The caseation of tuberculous granulation tissue and its liquefaction is
a slow and insidious process, and is unattended with the classical signs
present, they are usually due to a mixed infection.
and cells from the adjacent blood vessels exude into the cavity, and
cream-cheese. From the addition of a sufficient number of leucocytes,
The wall of the abscess is lined with tuberculous granulation tissue,
the inner layers of which are undergoing caseation and disintegration,
and present a shreddy appearance; the outer layers consist of
tuberculous tissue which has not yet undergone caseation. The abscess
surrounding tissues by tubercle bacilli. In this way a tuberculous
reaches a free surface and ruptures externally. The direction in which
and possibly to some extent by gravity, and the abscess may reach the
illustration of this is seen in the psoas abscess, which may originate
muscle, and finally appear in the thigh.
abscess is one of its characteristic features. The swelling may attain a
the abscess, there are no symptoms of poisoning. The abscess varies in
Its shape also varies; it is usually that of a flattened sphere, but it
it is hour-glass or dumb-bell shaped, as is well illustrated in the
region of the groin in disease of the spine or pelvis, where there may
be a large sac occupying the venter ilii, and a smaller one in the
thigh, the two communicating by a narrow channel under Poupart's
ligament. By pressing with the fingers the pus may be displaced from one
progresses slowly, and finally reaches a free surface--generally the
of temperature. Fluctuation becomes evident and superficial, and the
the discharge of pus continues, and the track opening on the skin
remains as a _sinus_. The persistence of suppuration is due to the
presence in the wall of the abscess and of the sinus, of tuberculous
gain access to the sinus, and through it to the wall of the abscess.
They tend further to depress the resisting power of the tissues, and
superadded infection with pyogenic organisms exposes the patient to the
further risks of septic intoxication, especially in the form of hectic
tuberculosis, and to waxy degeneration of the internal organs. The mixed
infection is chiefly responsible for the pyrexia, sweating, and
tuberculous abscess may in one or other of these ways be a cause of
death.
appearance months, or even years, after the apparent cure of tuberculous
disease--as, for example, in the hip-joint or spine. It is called
residual because it has its origin in the remains of the original
woman aged thirty.]
#Diagnosis.#--A cold abscess is to be diagnosed from a syphilitic gumma,
a cyst, and from lipoma and other soft tumours. The differential
easier by recognising the presence of a lesion that is likely to cause a
sacro-iliac joint. When it is about to burst externally, it may be
difficult to distinguish a tuberculous abscess from one due to infection
with pyogenic organisms. Even when the abscess is opened, the
appearances of the pus may not supply the desired information, and it
may be necessary to submit it to bacteriological examination. When the
condition is tuberculous, as in other forms of suppuration the causative
organisms can usually be recognised. Experimental inoculation will
establish a definite diagnosis, but it implies a delay of two to three
weeks.
general treatment. Many surgeons advise that so long as the abscess is
quiescent it should be left alone. All agree, however, that if it shows
a tendency to spread, to increase in size, or to approach the skin or a
bursting and becoming infected with pyogenic organisms. Simple
evacuation of the abscess by a hollow needle may suffice, or bismuth or
iodoform may be introduced after withdrawal of the contents.
employed in the form of a 10 per cent. solution in ether or the same
proportion suspended in glycerin. Either form becomes sterile soon after
upon its capacity for irritating the tissues and so inducing a
means of a glass-barrelled syringe, which is firmly screwed on to the
cannula. The amount injected varies with the size of the abscess and the
age of the patient; it may be said to range from two or three drams in
the case of children to several ounces in large abscesses in adults. The
those associated with spinal disease, may be cured by iodoform
injection, and this even when rupture of the abscess on the skin surface
be, and which is chiefly applicable in abscesses of moderate size, is by
wall_ with the sharp spoon. An incision is made which will give free
recesses may not be overlooked. After removal of the pus, the wall of
the abscess is scraped with the Volkmann spoon or with Barker's flushing
using the spoon, care must be taken that its sharp edge does not
perforate the wall of a vein or other important structure. Any debris
which may adhere to the walls is removed by rubbing with dry gauze. The
oozing of blood is arrested by packing the cavity for a few minutes with
gauze. After the packing is removed, iodoform powder is rubbed into the
layers so as to ensure primary union. If, on the other hand, there is
anus, it is safer to treat it by the open method, packing the cavity
with iodoform worsted or bismuth gauze, which is renewed at intervals of
Another method is to incise the abscess, cleanse the cavity with gauze,
dilute non-toxic B.I.P.P. (bismuth and iodoform 2 parts, vaseline 12
parts, hard paraffin, sufficient to give the consistence of butter). The
suture"--is left loose to permit of withdrawal of the gauze after
forty-eight hours; the waiting suture is then tied, and delayed primary
cellular tissue, any skin which is undermined and infected with tubercle
should be removed with the scissors at the same time that the abscess is
dealt with.
In abscesses treated by the open method, when the cavity has become
lined with healthy granulations, it may be closed by secondary suture,
or, if the granulating surface is flush with the skin, healing may be
persist because of the presence of tuberculous tissue in its wall, and
of superadded pyogenic infection, or because it serves as an avenue for
the escape of discharge from a focus of tubercle in a bone or a lymph
gland.
[Illustration: FIG. 35.--Tuberculous Sinus injected through its opening
in the forearm with bismuth paste.
(Mr. Pirie Watson's case--Radiogram by Dr. Hope Fowler.)]
extent and direction of any given sinus may be demonstrated by the use
of the probe, or, more accurately, by injecting the sinus with a paste
consisting of white vaseline containing 10 to 30 per cent. of bismuth
subcarbonate, and following its track with the X-rays (Fig. 35).
may be successful. Some caution must be observed in this treatment, as
symptoms of poisoning have been observed to follow its use. If they
manifest themselves, an injection of warm olive oil should be given; the
oil, left in for twelve hours or so, forms an emulsion with the bismuth,
measures fail, and the whole track of the sinus is accessible, it should
be laid open, scraped, and packed with bismuth or iodoform gauze until
The _tuberculous ulcer_ is described in the chapter on ulcers.
Definition.--Virus.--ACQUIRED SYPHILIS--Primary period:
    _Extra-genital chancres_--Treatment--Secondary period: _General
    symptoms, skin affections, mucous patches, affections of bones,
    joints, eyes_, etc.--Treatment: _Salvarsan_--_Methods of
    administering mercury_--Syphilis and marriage--Intermediate
    stage--_Reminders_--Tertiary period: _General symptoms_,
    membrane, bones, joints_, etc.--Second attacks.--INHERITED
Syphilis is an infective disease due to the entrance into the body of a
specific virus. It is nearly always communicated from one individual to
another by contact infection, the discharge from a syphilitic lesion
epithelium. The disease was unknown in Europe before the year 1493, when
it was introduced into Spain by Columbus' crew, who were infected in
Haiti, where the disease had been endemic from time immemorial (Bloch).
The granulation tissue which forms as a result of the reaction of the
tissues to the presence of the virus is chiefly composed of lymphocytes
blood vessels. Giant cells are not uncommon, but the endothelioid cells,
practically absent.
When syphilis is communicated from one individual to another by contact
and is known as _the primary lesion_. Those who have thus acquired the
disease may transmit it to their offspring, who are then said to suffer
from _inherited syphilis_.
inherited, is the organism, described by Schaudinn and Hoffman, in 1905,
under the name of _spirochaeta pallida_ or _spironema pallidum_. It is a
delicate, thread-like spirilla, in length averaging from 8 to 10 u and
in width about 0.25 u, and is distinguished from other spirochaetes by
its delicate shape, its dead-white appearance, together with its closely
twisted spiral form, with numerous undulations (10 to 26), which are
during rest and in active movement (Fig. 36). In a fresh specimen, such
it shows active movements. The organism is readily destroyed by heat,
and perishes in the absence of moisture. It has been proved
removal from the body. Noguchi has succeeded in obtaining pure cultures
parts of the primary lesion, from papules on the skin, or from blisters
artificially raised on lesions of the skin or on the immediately
Giemsa's method, and its recognition is greatly aided by the use of the
and has been isolated from the blood--with difficulty--and from lymph
withdrawn by a hollow needle from enlarged lymph glands. The saliva of
x 1000 diam. Burri method.]
In tertiary lesions there is greater difficulty in demonstrating the
Noguchi and Moore have discovered the spirochaete in the brain in a
persist in the body for a long time after infection; its presence has
been demonstrated as long as sixteen years after the original
acquisition of the disease.
In inherited syphilis the spirochaete is present in enormous numbers
throughout all the organs and fluids of the body.
Considerable interest attaches to the observations of Metchnikoff, Roux,
and Neisser, who have succeeded in conveying syphilis to the chimpanzee
and other members of the ape tribe, obtaining primary and secondary
lesions similar to those observed in man, and also containing the
all kinds of syphilitic lesions, including even the blood in the
the form of an indurated papule, in every respect resembling the
corresponding lesion in man, and associated with enlargement and
induration of the lymph glands. The primary lesion usually appears about
affection amongst apes would appear to be in proportion to the nearness
of the relationship of the animal to the human subject. The eye of the
rabbit is also susceptible to inoculation from syphilitic lesions; the
chamber of the eye.
Attempts to immunise against the disease have so far proved negative,
but Metchnikoff has shown that the inunction of the part inoculated with
infection, suffices to neutralise the virus in man, and up to eighteen
hours in monkeys. He recommends the adoption of this procedure in the
Noguchi has made an emulsion of dead spirochaetes which he calls
tuberculin in tuberculosis, a papule or a pustule forming at the site of
tertiary and latent forms of syphilis, which are precisely those forms
in which the diagnosis is surrounded with difficulties.
ACQUIRED SYPHILIS
under favourable conditions for conveying the disease from one person to
the other. In the male the possibility of infection taking place is
increased if the virus is retained under cover of a long and tight
in contact. The frequency with which infection takes place on the
venereal disease, although there are other ways in which it may be
contracted.
digital examination of syphilitic patients by doctors or nurses, or
infection of the surgeon's fingers while operating upon a syphilitic
through the medium of articles contaminated by a syphilitic
instruments, table utensils, towels, or underclothing. Physiological
syphilitic sore. While the saliva itself is innocuous, it can be, and
often is, contaminated by the discharge from mucous patches or other
borne in mind, there is a danger of failing to recognise the primary
lesion of syphilis in unusual positions, such as the lip, finger, or
known as _syphilis insontium_.
#Stages or Periods of Syphilis.#--Following the teaching of Ricord, it
is customary to divide the life-history of syphilis into three periods
the different stages overlap one another, and the lesions of one stage
merge insensibly into those of another. Wide variations are met with in
no valid distinction to be drawn between secondary and tertiary lesions.
from four to eight weeks,--and includes the period of incubation, the
appendages, the mucous membranes, and the lymph glands.
secondary, so that during the remainder of his life the patient is
liable to suffer from manifestations which may affect the deeper tissues
and internal organs as well as the skin and mucous membranes.
#Primary Syphilis.#--_The period of incubation_ represents the interval
that elapses between the occurrence of infection and the appearance of
the primary lesion at the site of inoculation. Its limits may be stated
as varying from two to six weeks, with an average of from twenty-one to
twenty-eight days. While the disease is incubating, there is nothing to
show that infection has occurred.
_The Primary Lesion._--The incubation period having elapsed, there
appears at the site of inoculation a circumscribed area of infiltration
which represents the reaction of the tissues to the entrance of the
larger than a split pea. Its surface is at first smooth and shiny, but
as necrosis of the tissue elements takes place in the centre, it becomes
first occupied by yellow necrosed tissue, but in time this is replaced
by smooth, pale-pink granulation tissue; finally, epithelium may spread
lesion, unless, as a result of exposure to mechanical or septic
and yields a purulent discharge. The primary lesion may persist until
the secondary manifestations make their appearance, that is, for several
weeks.
It cannot be emphasised too strongly that the induration of the primary
lesion, which has obtained for it the name of "hard chancre," is its
grasped from side to side between the finger and thumb. The sensation on
grasping it has been aptly compared to that imparted by a nodule of
cartilage, or by a button felt through a layer of cloth. The evidence
obtained by touch is more valuable than that obtained by inspection, a
induration is due not only to the dense packing of the connective-tissue
spaces with lymphocytes and plasma cells, but also to the formation of
new connective-tissue elements. It is most marked in chancres situated
rigidity to the prepuce, which is most apparent when it is rolled back
over the corona. (2) At the orifice of the prepuce the primary lesion
these is attended with infiltration, the prepuce cannot be pulled
back--a condition known as _syphilitic phimosis_. (3) On the glans penis
of the penis itself. (5) At either end of the torn fraenum, in the form
to the meatus and canal of the urethra, in either of which situations
the swelling and induration may lead to narrowing of the urethra, so
stream; stricture results only in the exceptional cases in which the
chancre has ulcerated and caused destruction of tissue. A chancre within
can only be recognised by the discharge from the meatus and by the
induration is rarely characteristic and does not last so long. The
primary lesion may take the form of condylomata. Indurated oedema, with
of syphilis.
The hard chancre is usually solitary, but sometimes there are two or
more; when there are several, they are individually smaller than the
It is the exception for a hard chancre to leave a visible scar, hence,
genitals. When the primary lesion has taken the form of an open ulcer
_Infection of the adjacent lymph glands_ is usually found to have taken
place by the time the primary lesion has acquired its characteristic
induration. Several of the glands along Poupart's ligament, on one or on
freely movable, and are rarely sensitive unless there is superadded
their presence is of great value in diagnosis. In a certain number of
cases, one of the main _lymph vessels_ on the dorsum of the penis is
transformed into a fibrous cord easily recognisable on palpation, and
situated within the sac of a prepuce which cannot be retracted. If the
prepuce, and is tender on pressure. As under these conditions it is
impossible for the patient to keep the parts clean, septic infection
sloughing of the prepuce--a condition known as _phagedaena_. The
discharge is then foul and blood-stained, and the prepuce becomes of a
when it appears on parts of the body other than the genitals. It differs
in some respects from the hard chancre as met with on the penis; it is
usually larger, the induration is more diffused, and the enlarged glands
are softer and more sensitive. The glands in nearest relation to the
sore are those first affected, for example, the epitrochlear or axillary
glands in chancre of the finger; the submaxillary glands in chancre of
the lip or mouth; or the pre-auricular gland in chancre of the eyelid or
forehead. In consequence of their divergence from the typical chancre,
and of their being often met with in persons who, from age,
surroundings, or moral character, are unlikely subjects of venereal
the persistence of the lesion, its want of resemblance to anything else,
or the onset of constitutional symptoms, determines the diagnosis of
and is associated with induration and enlargement of the adjacent
glands, is most likely to be the primary lesion of syphilis.
[Illustration: FIG. 38.--Primary Lesion on Thumb, with Secondary
Eruption on Forearm.[1]]
[1] From _A System of Syphilis_, vol. ii., edited by D'Arcy Power and
J. Keogh Murphy, Oxford Medical Publications.
chancre_, or _chancroid_, which is also a common form of venereal
disease, and is due to infection with a virulent pus-forming bacillus,
of minute oval rods measuring about 1.5 u in length, which stain readily
short chains. Soft sores are always contracted by direct contact from
another individual, and the incubation period is a short one of from two
to five days. They are usually situated in the vicinity of the fraenum,
and, in women, about the labia minora or fourchette; they probably
which are rapidly converted into small, acutely inflamed ulcers with
sharply cut, irregular margins, which bleed easily and yield an abundant
yellow purulent discharge. They are devoid of the induration of
syphilis, are painful, and nearly always multiple, reproducing
themselves in successive crops by auto-inoculation. Soft sores are often
complicated by phimosis and balanitis, and they frequently lead to
infection of the glands in the groin. The resulting bubo is ill-defined,
painful, and tender, and suppuration occurs in about one-fourth of the
glands are found lying bathed in pus. Ducrey's bacillus is found in pure
_Treatment._--Soft sores heal rapidly when kept clean. If concealed
under a tight prepuce, an incision should be made along the dorsum to
with a mixture of one part iodoform and two parts boracic or salicylic
acid, or, when the odour of iodoform is objected to, of equal parts of
boracic acid and carbonate of zinc. Immersion of the penis in a bath of
eusol for some hours daily is useful. The sore is then covered with a
piece of gauze kept in position by drawing the prepuce over it, or by a
the sore is recommended by C. H. Mills. If the sores spread in spite of
this, they should be painted with cocaine and then cauterised. When the
and a dressing impregnated with ichthyol and glycerin (10 per cent.)
Harrison recommends aspiration of a bubonic abscess, followed by
injection of 1 in 20 solution of tincture of iodine into the cavity;
this is in turn aspirated, and then 1 or 2 c.c. of the solution injected
and left in. This is repeated as often as the cavity refills. It is
and continue the use of the suction bell.
_Diagnosis of Primary Syphilis._--In cases in which there is a history
indurated, persistent, and indolent, and attended with bullet-buboes in
however, to the great importance of instituting treatment at the
earliest possible stage of the infection, an effort should be made to
Before any antiseptic is applied, the margin of the suspected sore is
rubbed with gauze, and the serum that exudes on pressure is collected
an enlarged lymph gland with a hypodermic needle, injecting a few minims
stage, as it does not appear until the disease has become generalised
nurses, are specially liable to be overlooked, if the possibility of
It is important to bear in mind _the possibility of a patient having
acquired a mixed infection_ with the virus of soft chancre, which will
which shows itself after an interval of several weeks. This occurrence
is now established that syphilis does not follow upon soft sores unless
the virus of syphilis has been introduced at the same time. The
practitioner must be on his guard, therefore, when a patient asks his
of exposure to infection. Such a patient is naturally anxious to know
whether he has contracted syphilis or not, but neither a positive nor a
negative answer can be given--unless the spirochaete can be identified.
that associated with epithelioma. In difficult cases the prepuce must be
Difficulty may occur in the diagnosis of primary syphilis from _herpes_,
as this may appear as late as ten days after connection; it commences as
a group of vesicles which soon burst and leave shallow ulcers with a
Apprehensive patients who have committed sexual indiscretions are apt to
regard as syphilitic any lesion which happens to be located on the
penis--for example, acne pustules, eczema, psoriasis papules, boils,
parts, lanoline 67 parts, and vaseline 10 parts (Metchnikoff's cream) is
may be dusted lightly with a powder composed of equal parts of calomel
and carbonate of zinc. A gauze dressing is applied, and the penis and
scrotum should be supported against the abdominal wall by a triangular
handkerchief or bathing-drawers; if there is inflammatory oedema the
In _concealed chancres_ with phimosis, the sac of the prepuce should be
phagedaena occurs, the prepuce must be slit open along the dorsum, or if
sloughing, cut away, and the patient should have frequent sitz baths of
weak sublimate lotion. When the chancre is within the meatus, iodoform
bland by drinking large quantities of fluid.
General treatment is considered on p. 149.
#Secondary Syphilis.#--The following description of secondary syphilis
is based on the average course of the disease in untreated cases. The
infection, and the manifestations are the result of the entrance of the
virus into the general circulation, and its being carried to all parts
is feverish and out of sorts, losing appetite, becoming pale and anaemic,
leucocytosis, but the increase is due not to the polymorpho-nuclear
leucocytes but to lymphocytes. In isolated cases the temperature rises
to 101 o or 102 o F. and the patient loses flesh. The lymph glands,
become enlarged and slightly tender. The hair comes out, eruptions
appear on the skin and mucous membranes, and the patient may suffer from
regarded as being of the nature of reactions against accumulations of
the parasite, lymphocytes and plasma cells being the elements chiefly
concerned in the reactive process.
_Affections of the Skin_ are among the most constant manifestations. An
evanescent macular rash, not unlike that of measles--_roseola_--is the
infection; it is widely diffused over the trunk, and the original dull
rose-colour soon fades, leaving brownish stains, which in time
disappear. It is usually followed by a _papular eruption_, the
individual papules being raised above the surface of the skin, smooth or
scaly, and as they are due to infiltration of the skin they are more
persistent than the roseoles. They vary in size and distribution, being
papules and faded roseoles is very suggestive of syphilis.
Other types of eruption are less common, and are met with from the third
unless it affects the scalp and forehead and is associated with the
pustules are of large size, and, after breaking on the surface, give
rise to superficial ulcers; the discharge from the ulcer often dries up
and forms a scab or crust which is continually added to from below as
the ulcer extends in area and depth. The term _rupia_ is applied when
resembling the shell of a limpet. If the crust is detached, a sharply
defined ulcer is exposed, and when this heals it leaves a scar which is
usually circular, thin, white, shining like satin, and the surrounding
skin is darkly pigmented; in the case of deep ulcers, the scar is
depressed and adherent (Fig. 39).
crusts or scabs.]
In the later stages there may occur a form of creeping or _spreading
ulceration of the skin_ of the face, groin, or scrotum, healing at one
especially in women, around the anus, beneath large pendulous mammae,
between the toes, and at the angles of the mouth, and in these
ovoid areas in which the skin is thickened and raised above the surface;
very infective discharge. Under the influence of irritation and want of
cheek, and when they ulcerate may leave fissure-like scars radiating
from the mouth--an appearance best seen in inherited syphilis (Fig. 44).
normal shedding of the hair, or in scattered areas over the scalp
(_syphilitic alopoecia_). The hair is not re-formed in the scars which
result from ulcerated lesions of the scalp. The _nail-folds_
occasionally present a pustular eruption and superficial ulceration, to
nails become brittle and ragged, and they may even be shed.
_The Mucous Membranes_, and especially those of the _mouth_ and
_throat_, suffer from lesions similar to those met with on the skin. On
a mucous surface the papular eruption assumes the form of _mucous
a number of small, _superficial, kidney-shaped ulcers_, especially along
the margins of the tongue and on the tonsils. In the absence of mucous
patches and ulcers, the sore throat may be characterised by a bluish
tinge of the inflamed mucous membrane and a thin film of shed epithelium
on the surface. Sometimes there is an elongated sinuous film which has
been likened to the track of a snail. In the _larynx_ the presence of
raised white papules resembling warts, especially towards the centre of
the dorsum. These lesions are specially apt to occur in those who smoke,
those who are broken down in health from intemperance or other cause,
the sore throat may take the form of rapidly spreading, penetrating
ulcers in the soft palate and pillars of the fauces, which may lead to
highly characteristic of previous syphilis.
evanescent periostitis, the patient complaining of nocturnal pains over
the frontal bone, sternum, tibiae, and ulnae, and localised tenderness on
_The Affections of the Eyes_, although fortunately rare, are of great
not recognised and treated. _Iritis_ is the commonest of these, and may
occur in one or in both eyes, one after the other, from three to eight
the iris is discoloured and reacts sluggishly to light, and there is a
zone of ciliary congestion around the cornea. The appearance of minute
white nodules or flakes of lymph at the margin of the pupil is
especially characteristic of syphilitic iritis. When adhesions have
formed between the iris and the structures in relation to it, the pupil
dilates irregularly under atropin. Although complete recovery is to be
result in occlusion of the pupil and permanent impairment or loss of
The virus of syphilis exerts a special influence upon the _Blood
Vessels_, exciting a proliferation of the endothelial lining which
results in narrowing of their lumen, _endarteritis_, and a perivascular
infiltration in the form of accumulations of plasma cells around the
vessels and in the lymphatics that accompany them.
In the _Brain_, in the later periods of secondary and in tertiary
syphilis, changes occur as a result of the narrowing of the lumen of the
interfering with the nutrition of those parts of the brain supplied by
Affections of the _Spinal Cord_ are extremely rare, but paraplegia from
myelitis has been observed.
in different patients. Sometimes the virulent character of the disease
Constitutional symptoms, particularly pyrexia and anaemia, are most often
met with in young women. Patients over forty years of age have greater
difficulty in overcoming the infection than younger adults. Malarial and
countries, from the debility which they cause, tend to aggravate and
prolong the disease, which then assumes the characters of what has been
called _malignant syphilis_. All chronic ailments have a similar
of the parts of the body which are most often affected in this
disease--the scalp, mouth, throat, posterior cervical glands, and the
trunk, the patient being stripped and examined by daylight. Among the
_diagnostic features of the skin affections_ the following may be
mentioned: They are frequently, and sometimes to a marked degree,
example--are present at the same time; there is little itching; they are
at first a dull-red colour, but later present a brown pigmentation which
for those parts of the forehead and neck which are close to the roots of
the hair; they tend to pass off spontaneously; and they disappear
#Serum Diagnosis--Wassermann Reaction.#--Wassermann found that if an
extract of syphilitic liver rich in spirochaetes is mixed with the serum
application of the test is highly complicated and can only be carried
c.c. to 10 c.c. of the patient's blood, withdrawn under aseptic
transferred to a clean and dry glass tube. There is abundant evidence
A definitely positive reaction can usually be obtained between the
fifteenth and thirtieth day after the appearance of the primary lesion,
and as time goes on it becomes more marked. During the secondary period
the reaction is practically always positive. In the tertiary stage also
it is positive except in so far as it is modified by the results of
treatment. In para-syphilitic lesions such as general paralysis and
tabes a positive reaction is almost always present. In inherited
syphilis the reaction is positive in every case. A positive reaction may
be present in other diseases, for example, frambesia, trypanosomiasis,
and leprosy.
As the presence of the reaction is an evidence of the activity of the
spirochaetes, repeated applications of the test furnish a valuable means
of estimating the efficacy of treatment. The object aimed at is to
#Treatment of Syphilis.#--In the treatment of syphilis the two main
objects are to maintain the general health at the highest possible
known as salvarsan or "606." Other preparations, such as kharsivan,
containing from 27 to 31 per cent. of arsenic, and are equally
rendered alkaline before being injected. As subcutaneous and
intra-muscular injections cause considerable pain, and may cause
"914," which is more easily prepared and forms a neutral solution. It
contains from 18 to 20 per cent. of arsenic. Neo-kharsivan,
novo-arseno-billon, and neo-diarsenol belong to the "914" group, the
full dosage of which is 0.9 grm. As subcutaneous and intra-muscular
than intravenous injections, the administration is simpler.
Galyl, luargol, and other preparations act in the same way as the "606"
and "914" groups.
The "606" preparations may be introduced into the veins by injection or
gravity. The left median basilic vein is selected, and a platino-iridium
hypodermic syringe is used. The needle is passed for a few millimetres
along the vein, and the solution is then slowly introduced; before
withdrawing the needle some saline is run in to diminish the risk of
thrombosis.
The "914" preparations may be injected either into the subcutaneous
part is then massaged for a few minutes, and the massage is repeated
daily for a few days.
No hard-and-fast rules can be laid down as to what constitutes a
complete course of treatment. Harrison recommends as a _minimum_ course
of one of the "914" preparations in _early primary cases_ an initial
dose of 0.45 grm. given intra-muscularly or into the deep subcutaneous
weeks and give 0.6 grm. on two more successive weeks.
When a _positive Wassermann reaction_ is present before treatment is
With each injection of "914" after the first, throughout the whole
course 1 grain of mercury is injected intra-muscularly.
In the course of a few hours, there is usually some indisposition, with
a feeling of chilliness and slight rise of temperature; these symptoms
pass off within twenty-four hours, and in a few days there is a decided
improvement of health. Three or four days after an intra-muscular
injection there may be pain and stiffness in the gluteal region.
These preparations are the most efficient therapeutic agents that have
yet been employed in the treatment of syphilis.
The manifestations of the disease disappear with remarkable rapidity.
altogether in from twenty-four to thirty-six hours. Wassermann's
months, but later may again become positive. Subsequent doses of the
given in from 7 to 21 days according to the dose.
When syphilis occurs in a _pregnant woman_, she should be given in the
early months an ordinary course of "914," followed by 10-grain doses of
potassium iodide twice daily. The injections may be repeated two months
later, and during the remainder of the pregnancy 2-grain mercury pills
are given twice daily (A. Campbell). The presence of albumen in the
urine contra-indicates arsenical treatment.
It need scarcely be pointed out that the use of powerful drugs like
dose contains nearly three grains of arsenic. Before the administration
the patient must be overhauled; its administration is contra-indicated
combination of syphilitic aortitis and sclerosis of the coronary
central nervous system, especially advanced paralysis, and in such
disturbances of metabolism as are associated with diabetes and Bright's
urine for arsenic.
_The Administration of Mercury._--The success of the arsenical
preparations has diminished the importance of mercury in the treatment
of syphilis, but it is still used to supplement the effect of the
injections. The amount of mercury to be given in any case must be
proportioned to the idiosyncrasies of the patient, and it is advisable,
should be insisted upon, and half-dram doses of the alkaline sulphates
prescribed.
_Methods of Administering Mercury._--(1) _By the Mouth._--This was for
long the most popular method in this country, the preparation usually
employed being grey powder, in pills or tablets, each of which contains
one grain of the powder. Three of these are given daily in the first
till the standard for the individual patient is arrived at. As the grey
powder alone sometimes causes irritation of the bowels, it should be
combined with iron, as in the following formula: Hydrarg. c. cret. gr. 1;
ferri sulph. exsiccat. gr. 1 or 2.
(2) _By Inunction._--Inunction consists in rubbing into the pores of the
skin an ointment composed of equal parts of 20 per cent. oleate of
mercury and lanolin. Every night after a hot bath, a dram of the
minutes into the skin where it is soft and comparatively free from
mercury, inunction may be replaced by one of the other methods, of
administering the drug.
(3) _By Intra-muscular Injection._--This consists in introducing the
drug by means of a hypodermic syringe into the substance of the gluteal
needle of platino-iridium should be 5 cm. long and of a larger calibre
consists of: metallic mercury or calomel 1 dram, lanolin and olive oil
each 2 drams; it must be warmed to allow of its passage through the
buttock should be employed. Four courses each of ten injections are
cultivate the fresh-air habit, which is as beneficial in syphilis as in
digested, and should include a full supply of milk. Alcohol is
drinking of hot water between meals, say five or six tumblerfuls in the
twenty-four hours. The functions of the skin are further aided by
frequent hot baths, and by the wearing of warm underclothing. While the
patient should avoid exposure to cold, and taxing his energies by undue
use tobacco in moderation, his teeth should be thoroughly overhauled by
antiseptic tooth powder or wash. The mouth and throat should be rinsed
_Treatment of the Local Manifestations._--_The skin lesions_ are treated
on the same lines as similar eruptions of other origin. As local
ointments of the red oxide of mercury, ammoniated mercury, or oleate of
mercury (5 per cent.), or the mercurial plaster introduced by Unna. In
the treatment of condylomata the greatest attention must be paid to
cleanliness and dryness. After washing and drying the affected patches,
labia, are separated by sublimate wool. In the ulcers of later secondary
syphilis, crusts are got rid of in the first instance by means of a
boracic poultice, after which a piece of lint or gauze cut to the size
of the ulcer and soaked in black wash is applied and covered with
oil-silk. If the ulcer tends to spread in area or in depth, it should be
mercury, or a local hyperaemia may be induced by Klapp's suction
apparatus.
the ounce--painted on with a brush once daily. If this fails, the
lesions may be dusted with calomel the last thing at night. For deep
ulcers of the throat the patient should gargle frequently with chlorine
water or with perchloride of mercury (1 in 2000); if the ulcer continues
to spread it should be painted with acid nitrate of mercury.
completely rested, and the pupil is well dilated by atropin to prevent
_The Relations of Syphilis to Marriage._--Before the introduction of the
Ehrlich-Hata treatment no patient was allowed to marry until three years
had elapsed after the disappearance of the last manifestation. While
marriage might be entered upon under these conditions without risk of
the husband infecting the wife, the possibility of his conveying the
disease to the offspring cannot be absolutely excluded. It is
recommended, as a precautionary measure, to give a further mercurial
course of two or three months' duration before marriage, and an
intravenous injection of an arsenical preparation.
affections of the skin, mouth, or throat, already described. In the
skin, they may assume the form of peeling patches in the palms, or may
which if neglected may lead to the formation of fissures and superficial
ulcers. Less frequently there is a relapse of the eye affections, or of
paralytic symptoms from disease of the cerebral arteries.
treatment or who have had their powers of resistance lowered by
larger proportion of women, the patient has no knowledge of having
suffered from syphilis. Certain slight but important signs may give the
patches of leucoplakia on the tongue, cheek, or palate.
follows: They attack by preference the tissues derived from the
and viscera. They are often localised to one particular tissue or organ,
such, for example, as the subcutaneous cellular tissue, the bones, or
and persistent, with little tendency to natural cure, and they may be
dangerous to life, because of the destructive changes produced in such
organs as the brain or the larynx. They are remarkably amenable to
treatment if instituted before the stage which is attended with
destruction of tissue is reached. Early tertiary lesions may be
them; but the later the lesions the less is the risk of their containing
an infective virus.
The most prominent feature of tertiary syphilis consists in the
formation of granulation tissue, and this takes place on a scale
period. The granulation tissue frequently forms a definite swelling or
tumour-like mass (syphiloma), which, from its peculiar elastic
firm, semi-translucent greyish or greyish-red mass of tissue; later it
tissue elements of the part affected, and by involving these in the
produce the destructive lesions of the skin, mucous membranes, and
internal organs. This is true not only of the circumscribed gumma, but
connective-tissue framework of such organs as the tongue or liver. Both
the gummatous lesions and the fibrosis of tertiary syphilis are directly
excited by the spirochaetes.
and persist in this condition for an indefinite period, or it may be
absorbed and leave in its place a fibrous cicatrix. In the interior of a
long bone it may replace the rigid framework of the shaft to such an
extent as to lead to pathological fracture. If it is near the surface of
the body--as, for example, in the subcutaneous or submucous cellular
tissue, or in the periosteum of a superficial bone, such as the palate,
the skull, or the tibia--the tissue of which it is composed is apt to
undergo necrosis, in which the overlying skin or mucous membrane
syphilitic ulcer (Figs. 40 and 41).
_Tertiary Lesions of the Skin and Subcutaneous Cellular Tissue._--The
clinical features of a _subcutaneous gumma_ are those of an indolent,
painless, elastic swelling, varying in size from a pea to an almond or
walnut. After a variable period it usually softens in the centre, the
yellowish, honey-like substance, more frequently as a sodden, caseated
tissue resembling wash-leather. The caseated tissue of a gumma differs
tissue separates slowly and gradually, and in untreated cases may be
[Illustration: FIG. 40.--Ulcerating Gumma of Lips.
(From a photograph lent by Dr. Stopford Taylor and Dr. R. W. Mackenna.)]
_The tertiary ulcer_ may be situated anywhere, but is most frequently
over the calf. There may be one or more ulcers, and also scars of
occupied by gummatous tissue, or, if this has already separated and
sloughed out, by unhealthy granulations and a thick purulent discharge.
over a bone, is adherent to it. The features of the tertiary ulcer,
however, are not always so characteristic as the above description would
exclusively on the lower third of the leg; from Bazin's disease (p. 74);
from the ulcers that result from certain forms of malignant disease,
lesion, met with chiefly on the face and in the region of the external
genitals, in which the skin becomes infiltrated with granulation tissue
colour. It appears as isolated nodules, which may fuse together; the
epidermis becomes scaly and is shed, giving rise to superficial ulcers
which are usually covered by crusted discharge. The disease tends to
spread, creeping over the skin with a serpiginous, crescentic, or
horse-shoe margin, while the central portion may heal and leave a scar.
From the fact of its healing in the centre while it spreads at the
margin, it may resemble tuberculous disease of the skin. It can usually
months an area which in the case of tuberculosis would require as many
and the disease rapidly yields to anti-syphilitic treatment.
in a woman aet. 24, the subject of inherited syphilis, showing active
ulceration, cicatricial contraction, and sabre-blade deformity of
_Tertiary lesions of mucous membrane and of the submucous cellular
rectum. They originate as gummata or as gummatous infiltrations, which
are liable to break down and lead to the formation of ulcers which may
dangerous to life. In the tongue the tertiary ulcer may prove the
starting-point of cancer; and in the larynx or rectum the healing of the
ulcer may lead to cicatricial stenosis.
Tertiary lesions of the _bones and joints_, of the _muscles_, and of the
_internal organs_, will be described under these heads. The part played
by syphilis in the production of disease of arteries and of aneurysm
will be referred to along with diseases of blood vessels.
_Treatment._--The most valuable drugs for the treatment of the
effects, the latter are frequently prescribed along with carbonate of
case; 5 grains three times a day may suffice, or it may be necessary to
increase each dose to 20 or 25 grains. The symptoms of iodism which may
follow from the smaller doses usually disappear on giving a larger
amount of the drug. It should be taken after meals, with abundant water
continue the iodides for from one to three months after the lesions for
which they are given have cleared up. If the potassium salt is not
hastened by the application of a fly-blister. When a gumma has broken on
iodoform; if an ointment is indicated, the choice lies between the red
#Second Attacks of Syphilis.#--Instances of re-infection of syphilis
introduction of arsenical treatment. A remarkable feature in such cases
is the shortness of the interval between the original infection and the
alleged re-infection; in a recent series of twenty-eight cases, this
interval was less than a year. Another feature of interest is that when
from lesions from these in the primary and secondary stage lesions of
described by Hutchinson and by Fournier, as it may be the source of
difficulty in diagnosis. A patient who has had an infecting chancre one
or more years before, may present a slightly raised induration on the
regarded as the primary lesion of a second attack of syphilis, but the
manifestations develop. These facts, together with the disappearance of
the induration under treatment, make it very likely that the lesion is
really gummatous in character.
INHERITED SYPHILIS
transmitted from infected parents to their offspring, the children
exhibiting the manifestations that characterise the acquired form of the
disease.
The more recent the syphilis in the parent, the greater is the risk of
the disease being communicated to the offspring; so that if either
parent suffers from secondary syphilis the infection is almost
transmitting the disease to the next generation, the method of
probable that the infection is conveyed to the foetus by the placental
circulation. In the case of a syphilitic father, it is commonly believed
that the infection is conveyed to the ovum through the seminal fluid at
the moment of conception. If a series of children, one after the other,
the absence of any primary stage, the infection being a general one from
the outset. The spirochaete is demonstrated in incredible numbers in the
liver, spleen, lung, and other organs, and in the nasal secretion, and,
made. The manifestations differ in degree rather than in kind from those
The virus exercises an injurious influence on the foetus, which in many
miscarriage results, and this may take place in repeated pregnancies,
the date at which the miscarriage occurs becoming later as the virus in
the mother becomes attenuated. Eventually a child is carried to full
term, and it may be still-born, or, if born alive, may suffer from
the other.
begins to show evidence of the syphilitic taint.
The usual phenomena are that the child ceases to thrive, becomes thin
and sallow, and suffers from eruptions on the skin and mucous membranes.
There is frequently a condition known as _snuffles_, in which the nasal
passages are obstructed by an accumulation of thin muco-purulent
within a month after birth and before the eruptions on the skin appear.
condition known as the "saddle-nose" deformity (Figs. 43 and 44).
(From Dr. Byrom Bramwell's _Atlas of Clinical Medicine_.)]
_Affections of the Skin._--Although all types of skin affection are met
eruption, the papules being of large size, with a smooth shining top and
of a reddish-brown colour. It affects chiefly the buttocks and thighs,
the genitals, and other parts which are constantly moist. It is
skin and the coppery colour of the eruption. At the anus the papules
acquire the characters of _condylomata_, also at the angles of the
mouth, where they often ulcerate and leave radiating scars.
hoarse.
_Affections of the Bones._--Swellings at the ends of the long bones, due
to inflammation at the epiphysial junctions, are most often observed at
the upper end of the humerus and in the bones in the region of the
elbow. Partial displacement and mobility at the ossifying junction may
not move the limb voluntarily, the condition is spoken of as _the
anti-syphilitic treatment and immobilisation of the limb.
new bone by the periosteum, is sometimes met with.
[Illustration: FIG. 44.--Facies of Inherited Syphilis.]
The conditions of the skull known as Parrot's nodes or bosses, and
craniotabes, were formerly believed to be characteristic of inherited
syphilis, but they are now known to occur, particularly in rickety
symmetrically around the anterior fontanelle, or may extend along either
side of the sagittal suture, which appears as a deep groove--the
permanently altered in shape, the frontal and parietal eminences
bone becomes thin and soft, reverting to its original membranous
condition, so that the affected areas dimple under the finger like
influenced by the pressure of the head on the pillow. Craniotabes is
Between the ages of three and six months, certain other phenomena may be
liver.
In the majority of cases the child recovers from these early
manifestations, especially when efficiently treated, and may enjoy an
correspond to those of the tertiary period of acquired syphilis.
gummatous infiltration which is also liable to ulcerate, leaving
disfiguring scars, especially on the face. The palate and fauces may be
process is associated with a putrid discharge--ozaena--the destruction of
tissue may be considerable and result in unsightly deformity. The entire
palatal portions of the upper jaws, the vomer, turbinate, and other
bones bounding the nasal and oral cavities, may disappear, so that on
looking into the mouth the base of the skull is readily seen. Gummatous
the bones of the hand, as syphilitic dactylitis, and in the bones of the
bilateral, and may assume the form of gummatous ulcers and sinuses. In
addition, is described as the "sabre-blade" deformity. Among lesions of
the viscera, mention should be made of gumma of the testis, which causes
observed in infants a few months old.
Occasionally a syphilitic child suffers from a succession of these
gummatous lesions with resulting ill-health, and, it may be, waxy
present no further manifestations of the inherited taint.
_Affections of the Eyes._--At or near puberty there is frequently
observed an affection of the eyes, known as _chronic interstitial
keratitis_, the relationship of which to inherited syphilis was first
established by Hutchinson. It occurs between the ages of six and sixteen
diffuse haziness or steaminess near the centre of the cornea, and as it
blindness, but there is little pain or photophobia; a certain amount of
pink or salmon colour from the formation in it of new blood vessels. The
ophthalmoscope.
ulceration and resulting in stenosis; and lesions of the _nervous
system_ which may result in convulsions, paralysis, or dementia.
In a limited number of cases, about the period of puberty there may
develop _deafness_, which is usually bilateral and may become absolute.
or peg-shaped, and present at their cutting margin a deep semilunar
Hutchinson, who first described them. Affecting as they do the
permanent teeth, they are not available for diagnosis until the child is
over eight years of age. Henry Moon drew attention to a change in the
first molars; these are reduced in size and dome-shaped through dwarfing
the buttocks and snuffles there is no difficulty in recognising the
disease. When, however, the rash is scanty or is obscured by co-existing
eruption, on the brown stains which are left after it has passed off, on
miscarriages and still-born children may afford confirmatory evidence.
by noting the therapeutic effects of grey powder, which, in syphilitic
While a considerable number of syphilitic children grow up without
showing any trace of their syphilitic inheritance, the majority retain
Dwarfing of stature from interference with growth at the epiphysial
junctions; the forehead low and vertical, and the parietal and frontal
antecedent keratitis; alterations in the fundus oculi from choroiditis;
deafness; depressed scars or nodes on the bones from previous gummata;
"sabre-blade" or other deformity of the tibiae.
#The Contagiousness of Inherited Syphilis.#--In 1837, Colles of Dublin
stated his belief that, while a syphilitic infant may convey the disease
to a healthy wet nurse, it is incapable of infecting its own mother if
nursed by her, even although she may never have shown symptoms of the
disease. This doctrine, which is known as _Colles' law_, is generally
accepted in spite of the alleged occurrence of occasional exceptions.
The older the child, the less risk there is of its communicating the
disease to others, until eventually the tendency dies out altogether, as
it does in the tertiary period of acquired syphilis. It should be
added, however, that the contagiousness of inherited syphilis is denied
by some observers, who affirm that, when syphilitic infants prove
cannot transmit the disease by inheritance to their offspring, and that,
although they very rarely acquire the disease _de novo_, it is possible
their neighbours. Hutchinson insisted on the fact that there is little
bad health in the general community that can be attributed to inherited
syphilis.
#Treatment.#--Arsenical injections are as beneficial in the inherited as
should, if possible, be nursed by its mother, and failing this it should
mother; in others, it is administered in the same manner as already
manifestations it should be given 0.05 grm, novarsenbillon, injected
into the deep subcutaneous tissues every week for six weeks, followed by
in every possible direction; considerable benefit may be derived from
gummatous lesions of the nose, throat, larynx, and bones, either with
the object of arresting the spread of the disease, or of removing or
alleviating the resulting deformities. In children suffering from
time to time, especially in cases complicated with iritis.
with in infants and young children, it is apt to be taken for granted
that the disease has been inherited. It is possible, however, for them
to acquire the disease--as, for example, while passing through the
maternal passages during birth, through being nursed or kissed by
infected women, or through the rite of circumcision. The risk of
vaccination has been abolished by the use of calf lymph.
children are similar to those observed in the adult, with a tendency,
CHAPTER X
TUMOURS[2]
Definition--Etiology--General characters of innocent and malignant
    tumours. CLASSIFICATION OF TUMOURS: I. Connective-tissue tumours:
    (1) _Innocent_: _Lipoma_, _Xanthoma_, _Chondroma_, _Osteoma_,
    Cancer_--III. Dermoids--IV. Teratoma. Cysts: _Retention_,
    _Exudation_, _Implantation_, _Parasitic_, _Lymphatic or Serous_.
    Ganglion.
A tumour or neoplasm is a localised swelling composed of newly formed
tissue which fulfils no physiological function. Tumours increase in size
quite independently of the growth of the body, and there is no natural
over-growths as are of the nature of simple hypertrophy or local
giantism, and also from inflammatory swellings, which usually develop
under the influence of a definite cause, have a natural termination, and
tend to disappear when the cause ceases to act.
The _etiology of tumours_ is imperfectly understood. Various factors,
acting either singly or in combination, may be concerned in their
development. Certain tumours, for example, are the result of some
origin. This would appear to be the case in many tumours of blood
vessels (angioma), of cartilage (chondroma), of bone (osteoma), and of
secreting gland tissue (adenoma). The theory that tumours originate from
foetal residues or "rests," is associated with the name of Cohnheim.
These rests are supposed to be undifferentiated embryonic cells which
This mode of origin is illustrated by the development of dermoids from
reference must be made to the influence of irritation. This is probably
the skin and in mucous membranes--for example, cancer of the skin, of
the lip, and of the tongue. The part played by injury is doubtful. It
not infrequently happens that the development of a tumour is preceded by
an injury of the part in which it grows, but it does not necessarily
It is possible that an injury may stimulate into active growth
of a tumour, or that it may alter the characters of a tumour which
already exists, causing it to grow more rapidly.
The popular belief that there is some constitutional peculiarity
concerned in the causation of tumours is largely based on the fact that
certain forms of new growth--for example, cancer--are known to occur
supernumerary or webbed fingers, and appear in members of the same
family through several generations.
For clinical purposes, tumours are arbitrarily divided into two
between them is, that while the evil effects of innocent tumours are
entirely local and depend for their severity on the environment of the
growth, malignant tumours wherever situated, in addition to producing
death.
_Innocent_, benign, or simple tumours present a close structural
resemblance to the normal tissues of the body. They grow slowly, and are
are easily enucleated, and they do not tend to recur after removal. In
they present no tendency to ulcerate and bleed unless the overlying skin
or mucous membrane is injured. Although usually solitary, some are
warts, and fibroid tumours of the uterus. They produce no constitutional
vital organs, and then only in virtue of their situation--for example,
suffocation, in the intestine causing obstruction of the bowels, or in
the vertebral canal causing pressure on the spinal medulla.
_Malignant tumours_ usually show a marked departure from the structure
and arrangement of the normal tissues of the body. Although the cells of
to take on a lower, more vegetative form; they may be regarded as
parasites living at the expense of the organism, multiplying
indefinitely and destroying everything with which they come in contact.
Malignant tumours grow more rapidly than innocent tumours, and tend to
although they may appear to be circumscribed by condensation of the
surrounding tissues; they are rarely multiple at the outset, but show a
marked tendency to spread to other parts of the body. Fragments of the
parent tumour may become separated and be carried off in the lymph or
rise to secondary growths. Malignant tumours tend to invade and destroy
the overlying skin or mucous membrane, and thus give rise to bleeding
is said to _fungate_. In course of time they give rise to a condition of
and emaciated, probably as a result of chronic poisoning from the
life, it may be by their local effects, such as ulceration and
haemorrhage, by favouring the entrance of septic infection, by
interfering with the function of organs which are essential to life, by
cachexia, or by a combination of these effects.
the rapidity, as well as on the mode, in which it causes death. Some
malignancy characterised by rapid generalisation of growths throughout
the body. Tumours that are structurally alike may show variations in
as well as to other factors which are as yet unknown.
emphatically stated that there is no hard-and-fast line between innocent
other. The possibility of the transformation of a benign into a
malignant tumour must be admitted. Such a transformation implies a
in fibrous and cartilaginous tumours, in tumours of the thyreoid gland,
under the influence of injury, prolonged or repeated irritation,
physiological conditions of the tissues which attend upon advancing
years.
measure be subjected to microscopical examination; the results are often
connective-tissue group and subsequently those that originate in
epithelium.
INNOCENT CONNECTIVE-TISSUE TUMOURS
in the body. The commonest variety is the _subcutaneous lipoma_, which
grows from the subcutaneous fat, and forms a soft, irregularly lobulated
dimpled or puckered when an attempt is made to pinch it up. As the fat
detected. These tumours vary greatly in size, occur at all ages, grow
slowly, and, while generally solitary, are sometimes multiple. They are
most commonly met with on the shoulder, buttock, or back. In certain
situations, such as the thigh and perineum, they tend to become
A fatty tumour is to be diagnosed from a cold abscess and from a cyst.
dimpling of the overlying skin, the lobulation of the tumour, which is
when pressed upon at its margin.
changes its characters; the only reasons for its removal by operation
are its unsightliness and its probable increase in size in the course of
lobules are left behind. If the overlying skin is damaged or closely
adherent, it should be removed along with the tumour.
[Illustration: FIG. 46.--Pedunculated Lipoma of Buttock of forty years'
_Multiple subcutaneous lipomas_ are frequently symmetrical, and in a
certain group of cases, met with chiefly in women, pain is a prominent
symptom, hence the term _adiposis dolorosa_ (Dercum). These multiple
tumours show little or no tendency to increase in size, and the pain
In the neck, axilla, and pubes a diffuse overgrowth of the subcutaneous
operation.
[Illustration: FIG. 47.--Diffuse Lipomatosis of Neck.]
congenital, and is most often met with in the hand; it forms a
projecting lobulated tumour, which, when situated in the palm, resembles
an angioma or a lymphangioma. The _subserous lipoma_ arises from the
extra-peritoneal fat in the posterior abdominal wall, in which case it
tends to grow forwards between the layers of the mesentery and to give
fat in the anterior abdominal wall and protrude from one of the hernial
openings or through an abnormal opening in the parietes, constituting a
the synovial membrane of a joint, and projects into its interior, giving
rise to the symptoms of loose body. Lipomas are also met with growing
from the adipose connective tissue _between or in the substance of
muscles_, and, when situated beneath the deep fascia, such as the fascia
differential diagnosis is difficult. It may be differentiated from a
cold abscess by puncture with an exploring needle.
[Illustration: FIG. 48.--Zanthoma of Hands in a girl aet. 14, showing
fibrous and fatty tissue, containing a granular orange-yellow pigment,
presents two clinical varieties. In the first of these, it occurs in the
form of raised yellow patches, usually in the skin of the eyelids of
chronic jaundice; the patches are often symmetrical, and as they
The second form occurs in children and adolescents; it may affect
being a combination of thickened yellow patches of skin and projecting
which they cause; exposure to the X-rays is to be preferred to
operation.
Buttocks. From same patient as Fig. 48.]
vascular connective tissue pass in between the nodules of cartilage
composing the tumour from the fibrous capsule which surrounds it. On
is firm and elastic in consistence, but certain portions may be densely
hard from calcification or ossification, while other portions may be
soft and fluctuating as a result of myxomatous degeneration and
nerves and arteries without injuring them. They may cause a deep hollow
the innocent chondroma and the malignant chondro-sarcoma are met with.
Chondroma may occur in a multiple form, especially in relation to the
phalanges and metacarpal bones. When growing in the interior of a bone
it causes a spindle-shaped enlargement of the shaft, which in the case
of a phalanx or metacarpal bone may resemble the dactylitis resulting
skiagram.
rounded area in the position of the tumour, which must be differentiated
from similar clear areas due to other kinds of tumour, especially the
myeloma; when it has undergone calcification or ossification, it gives a
[Illustration: FIG. 50.--Chondroma growing from infraspinous fossa of
Scapula.]
[Illustration: FIG. 51.--Chondroma of Metacarpal Bone of Thumb.]
_Treatment._--In view of the unstable quality of the chondroma,
soon as it is recognised. In those projecting from the surface of a
interior, a sufficient amount of the cortex should be removed to allow
of the tumour being scraped out, and care must be taken that no nodules
of cartilage are left behind. In multiple chondromas of the hand, when
the fingers are crippled and useless, exposure to the X-rays should be
The chondromas that are met with at the ends of the long bones in
related to the epiphysial cartilage, and it was suggested by Virchow
that they take origin from islands of cartilage which have not been used
up in the process of ossification. They are believed to occur more
frequently in those who have suffered from rickets. They have no
what are known as _cartilaginous exostoses_. These are sometimes met
with in a multiple form, and may occur in several generations of the
dealing with tumours of bone.
Minute nodules of cartilage sometimes form in the synovial membrane of
joints and lining of tendon sheaths and bursae: they tend to become
detached from the membrane and constitute loose bodies; they also
undergo a variable amount of calcification and ossification, so as to be
joints.
Cartilaginous tumours in the parotid, submaxillary gland, and testicle
belong to a class of "mixed tumours" that will be referred to later.
from the skeleton. Two varieties are recognised--the spongy or
osteoma_ is really an ossified chondroma, and is met with at the ends of
the long bones (Fig. 52). From the fact that it projects from the
surface of the bone it is often spoken of as an _exostosis_. It grows
nerve-trunk or upon a bursa which has developed over it. The Rontgen
rays show a dark shadow corresponding to the ossified portion of the
tumour, and continuous with that of the bone from which it is growing
(Fig. 138). Operative interference is only indicated when the tumour is
giving rise to inconvenience. It is then removed, its base or neck being
divided by means of the chisel. The multiple variety of osteoma is
considered with the diseases of bone.
[Illustration: FIG. 52.--Cancellous Osteoma of lower end of Femur.]
The _ivory_ or _compact osteoma_ is composed of dense bone, and usually
grows from the skull. It is generally sessile and solitary, and may grow
into the interior of the skull, into the frontal sinus, into the cavity
of the orbit or nose, or may fill up the external auditory meatus,
causing most unsightly deformity and interference with sight, breathing,
and hearing.
points of attachment to the skeleton, and are known as false exostoses;
they are described with the diseases of muscles.
#Odontoma.#--An odontoma is composed of dental tissues in varying
proportions and different degrees of development, arising from
tooth-germs or from teeth still in process of growth (Bland Sutton).
remain hidden below the mucous membrane and give no evidence of their
suppuration, and this may be the means of drawing attention to the
epithelium of the enamel organ, and constitutes a multilocular cystic
tumour which is chiefly met with in the mandible. The cystic spaces of
described by Eve under the name of multilocular cystic epithelial
tumours of the jaw.
The _follicular odontoma_, also known as a _dentigerous cyst_, is
containing a viscid fluid, and an imperfectly formed tooth is often
found embedded in its wall. The cyst usually forms in relation to one of
the permanent molars, and may attain considerable dimensions.
The _fibrous odontoma_ is the result of an overgrowth of fibrous tissue
_Composite Odontoma._--This is a convenient term to apply to certain
enamel, dentine, and cement. The tumour is to be regarded as being
derived from an abnormal growth of all the elements of a tooth germ, or
of two or more tooth germs, indiscriminately fused with one another. It
may appear in childhood, and form a smooth unyielding tumour, often of
considerable size, replacing the corresponding permanent tooth. It may
sloughing of the overlying soft parts. Many examples of this variety of
been erroneously regarded as osteomas even after removal.
mainly of dentine with a partial covering of enamel and cement.
_Diagnosis._--Odontomas are often only diagnosed after removal. When
attended with suppuration, the condition has been mistaken for disease
of the jaw. Fibrous odontomas have been mistaken for sarcoma, and
portions of the maxilla removed unnecessarily. Any circumscribed tumour
of the jaw, particularly when met with in a young adult, should suggest
the possibility of an odontoma. Skiagrams often give useful information
_Treatment._--The solid varieties of odontoma can usually be shelled out
after dividing the overlying soft parts. In the follicular variety, it
interior, and remove any tooth that may be present. The cavity is then
packed and allowed to heal from the bottom.
comparatively rich in cells and blood vessels, and in which the fibres
are arranged loosely; and the _hard fibroma_, which is composed of
closely packed bundles of fibres often arranged in a concentric fashion
around the blood vessels. The cut surface of the soft fibroma presents a
pinkish-white, fleshy appearance, resembling the slowly growing forms of
than the hard. In certain fibromas--in those, for example, which grow
from the periosteum of the base of the skull and project into the
naso-pharynx--the blood vessels are dilated into sinuses and have no
proper sheaths; they therefore tend to remain open when divided, and to
bleed excessively. Transition forms between soft fibroma and sarcoma are
met with, so that in operating for their removal it is safer to take
away the capsule along with the tumour, and the patient should be kept
under observation in view of the risk of recurrence.
also in the subcutaneous and intermuscular cellular tissue, and in the
abdominal wall, where it sometimes attains considerable dimensions.
as _keloid_ and _molluscum fibrosum_, and those met with in the _sheaths
of nerves_, are described elsewhere. Fibroid tumours of the uterus are
described with myoma.
_Diffuse fibroma_ or _Fibromatosis_, analogous to lipomatosis, is met
constitutes one form of neuro-fibromatosis; a similar change is also met
with in the stomach and colon.
clinically resembles the lipoma. Myxomatous tissue is, however,
frequently found in other connective-tissue tumours as a result of
degeneration, for example, in cartilaginous tumours and in sarcomas.
Myxomatous tissue is also a prominent constituent of the "innocent
[Illustration: FIG. 53.--Myeloma of Shaft of Humerus, causing
pathological fracture. (Mr. J. W. Struthers' case.)
(The unusual site of the tumour is to be noted.)]
tendon sheaths and bursae, and is then of an orange-yellow colour, the
the long bones, its favourite site being the upper end of the tibia.
present malignant features, and it can usually be extirpated by local
measures without fear of recurrence. The diagnosis, X-ray appearances,
association with an unusual form of protein in the urine (Bence Jones).
is very rare, and is met with in organs possessed of non-striped muscle,
such as the stomach, intestine, urinary bladder, and prostate. In the
uterus, which is the most common situation, these tumours contain a
_fibro-myomas_. They present on section a fasciculated appearance, which
may resemble that of a section of balls of cotton (Fig. 54). They are
encapsulated and vascular, frequently attain a large size, and may be
suffering, they frequently give rise to profuse haemorrhage from the
ureters or the intestine, or by complicating pregnancy and parturition.
The #Rhabdomyoma# is an extremely rare form of tumour, met with in the
kidney, uterus, and testicle. It contains striped muscle fibres, and is
supposed to originate from a residue of muscular tissue which has become
[Illustration: FIG. 54.--Fibro-myoma of Uterus.
#Glioma.#--A glioma is a tumour composed of neuroglia. It is met with
humour and to perforate the globe. It is usually of the nature of a
glio-sarcoma and is highly malignant.
#Endotheliomas# take origin from the endothelium of lymph vessels and
blood vessels, and serous cavities. They show great variation in type,
partly because of the number of different kinds of endothelium from
which they are derived, and partly because the new connective tissue
which is formed is liable to undergo transformation into other tissues.
endotheliomata of the skin have recently been described by Wise.
_Angioma_, _lymphangioma_, and _neuroma_ are described with the disease
of the individual tissues.
The term sarcoma is applied to any connective-tissue tumour which
exhibits malignant characters. The essential structural feature is the
predominance of the cellular elements over the intercellular substance
or stroma, in which respect a sarcoma resembles the connective tissue of
the embryo. The typical sarcoma consists chiefly of immature or
embryonic connective tissue. It most frequently originates from fascia,
intermuscular connective tissue, periosteum, bone-marrow, and skin, and
but the capsule merely consists of the condensed surrounding tissues,
and usually contains sarcomatous elements. The consistence of the tumour
depends on the nature and amount of the stroma, and on the presence of
exclusively of cells; while the harder forms--such as the fibro-,
are relatively poor in cells. Degenerative changes may produce areas of
of blood in the tumour, and on the presence of the products of
haemorrhage takes place into the substance of the tumour, the persistence
of the bleeding when it is incised or ulcerates through the skin, and
the readiness with which the sarcomatous cells are carried off and
infect distant parts through the blood-stream. Sarcomas are devoid of
lymphatics, and unless originating in lymphatic structures--for example,
in the tonsil--they rarely infect the lymph glands. Minute portions of
the tumour grow into the small veins, and, becoming detached, are
transported by the blood-current to distant organs, where they are
arrested in the capillaries and give rise to secondary growths. These
are most frequently situated in the lungs, except when the primary
growth lies within the territory of the portal circulation, in which
case they occur in the liver. The secondary growths closely resemble the
parent tumour. Sarcoma may invade an adjacent vein on such a scale that
if the invading portion becomes detached it may constitute a dangerous
pressure. Inflammatory and suppurative changes may take place as a
result of pyogenic infection following upon sloughing of the overlying
skin or upon an exploratory incision. Once the skin is broken the tumour
fungates through the opening. Sarcomas vary in malignancy, especially as
regards rapidity of growth and capacity for dissemination. Certain of
to recur locally after removal; others--especially the more cellular
ones--grow with extreme rapidity, and are early disseminated throughout
the body, resembling in these respects the most malignant forms of
primary multiple growths are occasionally met with in the skin and in
the bones.
peculiarities. Thus, in virtue of the size and character of the cells,
we have the _small round-celled_ and the _large round-celled_ sarcoma,
the _small_ and the _large spindle-celled_, the _giant-celled_ and the
_mixed-celled_ sarcoma. The _lympho-sarcoma_ presents a structure
similar to that of lymph-follicular tissue, and the _alveolar sarcoma_
an arrangement of cells in alveoli resembling that seen in cancers. When
[Illustration: FIG. 56.--Fungating Sarcoma of Arm.
The term _lymphangio-sarcoma_ is applied when the cells of the tumour
are derived from the endothelium of lymph spaces and vessels. The
element in the structure of the tumour. They are sometimes derived from
_glio-sarcoma_, _myxo-sarcoma_, _chondro-sarcoma_, and _myo-sarcoma_ are
mixed forms which usually develop in pre-existing innocent tumours. The
_osteo-sarcoma_ is characterised by the formation in the tumour of bone,
marrow. The _osteoid sarcoma_ is characterised by the formation of a
tissue resembling bone but deficient in lime salts, and the _petrifying
varieties, although met with chiefly in the bones, may occur in soft
tissues such as muscle, and in such organs as the mamma. The pigmented
varieties include the _chloroma_, which is of a light-green colour, and
the _melanotic sarcoma_, which is brown or black. The _psammoma_ is a
sarcoma containing a material resembling sand; it is chiefly met with in
the membranes of the brain. The _chordoma_ is a rare form of tumour
_Diagnosis of Sarcoma._--A sarcoma is to be differentiated from an
inflammatory swelling such as results from tubercle, actinomycosis, or
syphilis, from an innocent tumour, and from a cancer. The points on
_Treatment._--The removal of the tumour by operation is the most
reliable method of treatment; in order to be successful it must be
undertaken before dissemination has taken place, and a considerable area
removed, and in tumours near the surface of the body, the overlying skin
also.
thread is attached, is inserted into the space from which the tumour was
of a week or ten days the tube of radium is removed by pulling on the
action of the _X-rays_ as soon as the wound has healed. The employment
of these measures has diminished to a remarkable degree the recurrence
It will readily be understood that the less thoroughly or radically the
sarcoma and in cases in which, on account of their anatomical situation,
removal by operation is necessarily incomplete, the prospect of cure is
there are cases in which removal by operation is impossible, the
through an opening made by a large trocar, or, when necessary, by open
dissection. A second tube of radium is placed upon the skin over the
securing a cross-fire action of the radium rays, both from within and
inhibiting the cellular elements of the growth. The tubes of radium are
left _in situ_ for from eight to fourteen days, according to the power
order that every part of the tumour may be efficiently radiated. If the
second, or it may be even a third, application of radium will be
required.
EPITHELIAL TUMOURS
An excessive and erratic growth of epithelium is the essential and
papilloma and the adenoma; the malignant, the carcinoma or cancer.
_warts_--the covering consists of epidermis; in those growing from
mucous surfaces it consists of the epithelium covering the mucous
membrane. When the surface epithelium projects as filiform processes,
interior of certain cystic tumours of the breast and of the ovary.
Although papillomas are primarily innocent, they may become the
starting-point of cancer, especially in persons past middle life and if
the papilloma has been subjected to irritation and has ulcerated. The
considered with the individual tissues and organs.
#Adenoma.#--An adenoma is a tumour constructed on the type of, and
growing in connection with, a secreting gland. In the substance of such
skin or of a mucous membrane, they tend to project from the surface, and
form pedunculated tumours or polypi.
a considerable proportion of fibrous tissue, and is then called a
_myxo-adenoma_, and when the gland spaces of the tumour become distended
which are met with in the mamma and ovary. A characteristic feature of
the cystic variety is the tendency the tumour tissue exhibits to project
_intracystic growths_. They are essentially innocent, but intracystic
Transition forms between adenoma and carcinoma are also met with in the
rectum and large intestine, and these should be treated on the same
cancer cells are derived by proliferation from already existing
epithelium, and they invade the sub-epithelial connective tissue in the
form of simple or branching columns. These columns are enclosed in
which communicate freely with the lymph vessels. The cells composing the
columns and filling the alveoli vary with the character of the
epithelium in which the cancer originates. The malignancy of cancer
depends on the tendency which the epithelium has of invading the tissues
in its neighbourhood, and on the capacity of the cells, when
transported elsewhere by the lymph or blood-stream, of giving rise to
Cancer may arise on any surface covered by epithelium or in any of the
secreting glands of the body, but it is much more common in some
situations than in others. It is frequently met with, for example, in
the skin, in the stomach and large intestine, in the breast, the uterus,
thyreoid, prostate, and urinary bladder.
Tissues appear to be most liable to cancer when, having attained
maturity, they enter upon the phase of decadence or involution, and this
much, therefore, the age of the person in whom it occurs, as the age of
the tissue in which it arises, that determines the maximum incidence of
earlier than cancer of the skin; cancer of the uterus and mamma is more
frequent towards the decline of reproductive activity than in the later
second and third decades. There is evidence that the irritation caused
fact that a large proportion of those who become the subjects of cancer
of the mouth are excessive drinkers and smokers.
as a nodule in the substance of an organ, or as a diffuse thickening of
definition in cancerous tumours explains the difficulty of completely
removing them by surgical measures, and has led to the practice of
complete extirpation of cancerous organs wherever this is possible. The
by the disease, and the epithelial infiltration implicates the
surrounding parts. In cancer of the breast, for example, the disease
lip or tongue, to the mandible; in cancer of the uterus or intestine, to
the investing peritoneum.
In addition to its tendency to infiltrate adjacent tissues and organs,
cancer is also liable to give rise to _secondary growths_. These are
example, becoming infected from cancer of the lip, tongue, or throat;
those in the axilla, from cancer of the breast; those along the
curvatures of the stomach, from cancer of the pylorus; and those in the
cells may merely accumulate so as to fill the lumen and form indurated
cords, or they may proliferate and give rise to secondary nodules along
the course of the vessels. When the lymphatic network in the skin is
diffusely infected, the appearance is either that of a multitude of
secondary nodules or of a diffuse thickening, so that the skin comes to
resemble coarse leather. On the wall of the chest this condition is
attack the walls of the adjacent veins and spread into their interior at
course of the disease. It is probable that many of the cancer cells
which are carried away in the blood or lymph stream undergo necrosis and
fail to give rise to secondary growths. Secondary growths present a
faithful reproduction of the structure of the primary tumour. Apart from
the lymph glands, the chief seats of secondary growths are the liver,
lungs, serous membranes, and bone marrow.
It is generally believed that the secondary growths in cancer that
develop at a distance from the primary tumour, those, for example, in
the medullary canal of the femur or in the diploe of the skull occurring
in advanced cases of cancer of the breast, are the result of
dissemination of cancer cells by way of the blood-stream and are to be
regarded as emboli. Sampson Handley disagrees with this view; he
namely, by the actual growth of cancer cells along the finer vessels of
the lymph plexuses that ramify in the deep fascia, a method of spread
which he calls _permeation_. It is maintained also that permeation
occurs as readily against the lymph stream as with it. He compares the
spread of cancer to that of an invisible annular ringworm. The growing
edge extends in a wider and wider circle, within which a healing process
Healing occurs by a process of "peri-lymphatic fibrosis," but as the
natural process of healing may fail at isolated points, nodules of
cancer appear, which, although apparently separate from the primary
having destroyed the cancer chain connecting the nodule with the primary
distribution of the subcutaneous secondary nodules so frequently met
with in the late stages of mammary cancer. The area within which the
with the primary growth in the centre.
affected, the nodules rarely appear below the level of the deltoid or
the middle third of the thigh, the patient dying before the spread can
reach the distal portions of the limbs.
limbs, because of the fact that secondary cancer of the femur nearly
the intimate connection of the deep fascia with the periosteum over the
great trochanter, thus favouring invasion of the bone marrow when
theory from the fact that the humerus is rarely involved below the
insertion of the deltoid, and that spontaneous fracture of the femur is
three times more common on the side on which the breast cancer is
situated.
_cancerous ulcer_ (Fig. 57) are made up of tumour tissue which has not
indurated; sometimes they are raised and crater-like. The floor of the
ulcer is smooth and glazed, or occupied by necrosed tissue, and the
changes may become offensive. Haemorrhage is rarely a prominent feature,
[Illustration: FIG. 57.--Carcinoma of Breast with Cancerous Ulcer.]
_The Contagiousness of Cancer._--A limited number of cases are on record
in which a cancer appears to have been transferred by contact, as from
the lower to the upper lip, from one labium majus to the other, from the
to another, whether by accident, as in the case of a surgeon wounding
takes place after an operation for the removal of cancer, the recurrent
nodules make their appearance in the main scar or in the scars of
cancer taken from a mouse will not grow in the tissues of a rat, but
only in a mouse of the same variety as that from which the graft was
While cancer cannot be regarded as either contagious or infectious, it
is important to bear in mind the possibility of infection of a wound
with cancer when operating for the disease. A cancer should not be cut
made for exploration should be tightly closed by stitches before the
curative operation is proceeded with; the instruments used for the
exploration must not be used again until they have been boiled. The
great energy during recent years, but as yet without positive result. It
development of cancer, such as prolonged irritation, and a considerable
number of cases have been recorded in which cancer of the skin of the
hands has followed prolonged and repeated exposure to the Rontgen rays.
_The Alleged Increase of Cancer._--Regarding the alleged increase of
cancer, it may be pointed out that it is impossible to ascertain how
improved registration. It is probable also that some increase has taken
place in consequence of the increased average duration of life; a larger
proportion of persons now reach the age at which cancer is frequent.
which occurs in old people, and some forms of cancer in the rectum--are
so indolent in their progress that they can scarcely be said to shorten
life; while others--such as the softer varieties of mammary cancer
occurring in young women--are among the most malignant of tumours. The
by obstruction of the bowels; in the uterus, prostate, and bladder, by
of their situation, however, cancers frequently cause death by giving
cachexia_, a condition which is due to the continued absorption of
poisonous products from the tumour. The patient loses appetite, becomes
emaciated, pale, and feverish, and gradually loses strength until he
dies. In many cases, especially those in which ulceration has occurred,
of health.
cure. If carcinomatous disease is to be rooted out, its mode of spread
by means of the lymph vessels must be borne in mind, and as this occurs
vessels generally communicate freely with each other, and secondary
though they may not be noticeably enlarged, and in some cases--in cancer
removed at the same time.
great deal of attention within recent years, and many agents have been
any positive results. Most benefit has resulted from the use of radium
measure after every operation for cancer.
It has been demonstrated that cancer cells are more sensitive to radium
easily killed. The effect varies a good deal with the nature and seat of
the tumour. In rodent cancers of the skin, for example, both radium and
X-ray treatment are very successful, and are to be preferred to
operation because they yield a better cosmetic result. While small
so amenable as rodent cancers.
Cancers of mucous membranes are less amenable to ray treatment because
under the skin, the Rontgen rays are less efficient; if radium is
employed, the tube containing it should be inserted into the substance
Ray treatment is not to be looked upon as a rival but as a powerful
supplement to the operative treatment of cancer.
The varieties of cancer are distinguished according to the character and
The _squamous epithelial cancer_ or _epithelioma_ originates from a
surface covered by squamous epithelium, such as the skin, or the mucous
membrane of the mouth, gullet, or larynx. The cancer cells retain the
characters of squamous epithelium, and, being confined within the lymph
undergo a horny change. This results in the formation of concentrically
laminated masses known as cell nests.
The clinical features are those of a slowly growing indurated tumour,
which nearly always ulcerates; there is a characteristic induration of
the edges and floor of the ulcer, and its surface is often covered with
warty or cauliflower-like outgrowths (Fig. 58). The infection of the
lymph glands is early and constant, and constitutes the most dangerous
feature of the disease; the secondary growths in the glands exhibit the
characteristic induration, and may themselves break down and lead to the
[Illustration: FIG. 58.--Epithelioma of Lip.]
sequestration of epithelial cells during the process of cicatrisation.
The _columnar epithelial cancer_ or _columnar epithelioma_ originates in
mucous membranes covered with columnar epithelium, and is chiefly met
structure it is sometimes described as a _malignant adenoma_. Its
malignancy is shown by the proliferating epithelium invading the other
coats of the stomach or intestine, and by the development of secondary
arranged on any definite plan, but are closely packed in irregularly
shaped alveoli. If the alveoli are large and the intervening stroma is
scanty and delicate, the tumour is soft and brain-like, and is described
as a _medullary_ or _encephaloid cancer_. If the alveoli are small and
the intervening stroma is abundant and composed of dense fibrous tissue,
is most frequently met with in the breast. If the cells undergo
degeneration and absorption and the stroma contracts, the tumour becomes
still harder, and tends to shrink and to draw in the surrounding parts,
leading, in the breast, to retraction of the nipple and overlying skin,
of the tumour undergo colloid degeneration, a _colloid cancer_ results;
malignancy is thereby greatly diminished; if only partial, as is more
common in rectal cancer, the malignancy is not appreciably affected.
Melanin pigment is formed in relation to the cells and stroma of certain
epithelial tumours, giving rise to _melanotic cancer_, one of the most
malignant of all new growths. Cyst-like spaces may form in the tumour by
the accumulation of the secretion of the epithelial cells, or as a
result of their degeneration--_cystic carcinoma_. This is met with
chiefly in the breast and ovary, and the tumour resembles the cystic
adenoma, but it tends to infect its surroundings and gives rise to
and 103). It almost never infects the lymph glands.
DERMOIDS
A dermoid is a tumour containing skin or mucous membrane, occurring in a
arises from a portion of epiblast, which has become sequestrated during
the situations which correspond to the various clefts and fissures of
the embryo. It occurs also on the trunk in situations where the lateral
halves of the body coalesce during development. Such a dermoid usually
takes the form of a globular cyst, the wall of which consists of skin,
and the contents of turbid fluid containing desquamated epithelium, fat
droplets, cholestrol crystals, and detached hairs. Delicate hairs may
also be found projecting from the epithelial lining of the cyst.
frequently over the lower sacral vertebrae, giving rise to small
These recesses are lined with skin, which is furnished with hairs,
there results a dermoid cyst.
_Tubulo-dermoids_ arise from embryonic ducts and passages that are
normally obliterated at birth, for example, _lingual dermoids_ develop
in relation to the thyreo-glossal duct; _rectal and post-rectal_
dermoids to the post-anal gut; and _branchial dermoids_ in relation to
dermoids, save that mucous membrane takes the place of skin in the wall
of the cyst, and the contents consist of the pent-up secretion of mucous
glands.
_Clinical Features._--Although dermoids are of congenital origin, they
not till adult life. Superficial dermoids, such as those met with at the
outer angle of the orbit, form rounded, definitely limited tumours over
deeper parts, and when situated over the skull may be lodged in a
infected and suppurates, and finally ruptures on the surface. This may
lead to a natural cure, or a persistent sinus may form. Dermoids more
between the rectum and sacrum, give rise to difficulty in diagnosis,
even with the help of the X-rays, and their nature is seldom recognised
The treatment is to remove the cyst. When it is impossible to remove the
whole of the lining membrane by dissection, the portion that is left
should be destroyed with the cautery.
They usually take the form of unilocular or multilocular cysts, the
cavity of the cyst usually contains a pultaceous mixture of shed
epithelium, fluid fat, and hair. If the cyst ruptures, the epithelial
elements are diffused over the peritoneum, and may give rise to
interior.]
The ovarian dermoid appears clinically as an abdominal or pelvic tumour
provided with a pedicle; if the pedicle becomes twisted, the tumour
undergoes strangulation, an event which is attended with urgent
The treatment consists in removing the tumour by laparotomy.
a monstrosity such as conjoined twins or a parasitic foetus, but more
commonly it is met with as an irregularly shaped tumour, usually growing
from the sacrum. On dissection, such a tumour is found to contain a
curious mixture of tissues--bones, skin, and portions of viscera, such
requires to be considered in relation to the conditions present in each
individual case.
CYSTS[3]
with tumours.
by epithelium or endothelium; the contents are fluid or semi-solid, and
vary in character according to the tissue in which the cyst has
originated.
_Retention and Exudation Cysts._--_Retention cysts_ develop when the
duct of a secreting gland is partly obstructed; the secretion
accumulates, and the gland and its duct become distended into a cyst.
cysts or wens are described with diseases of the skin. _Exudation cysts_
arise from the distension of cavities which are not provided with
excretory ducts, such as those in the thyreoid.
_Implantation cysts_ are caused by the accidental transference of
portions of the epidermis into the underlying connective tissue, as may
to a cherry. The treatment consists in removing them by dissection.
_Parasitic cysts_ are produced by the growth within the tissues of
cyst-forming parasites, the best known being the taenia echinococcus,
which gives rise to the _hydatid cyst_. The liver is by far the most
With regard to the further life-history of hydatids, the living elements
of the cyst may die and degenerate, or the cyst may increase in size
converted into an abscess.
general it may be said that there is a slow formation of a globular,
elastic, fluctuating, painless swelling. Fluctuation is detected when
the cyst approaches the surface, and it is then also that percussion
may elicit the "hydatid thrill" or fremitus. This thrill is not often
obtainable, and in any case is not pathognomonic of hydatids, as it may
organs. The disease is more common in certain parts of Australia and in
Shetland and Iceland than in countries where the association of dogs in
the domestic life of the inhabitants is less intimate. Pfeiler, who has
complement deviation method as the most reliable; he believes that a
positive reaction may almost be regarded as absolutely diagnostic of an
The _treatment_ is to excise the cyst completely, or to inject into it a
these may readily disseminate the infection.
extravasated blood in the tissues, from haemorrhage taking place into a
preformed cyst, or from the saccular pouching of a varicose vein.
A _lymph cyst_ usually results from a contusion in which the skin is
thereby torn across. The cyst is usually situated between the skin and
and fluctuates readily, later it becomes larger and more tense. The
treatment consists in drawing off the contents through a hollow needle
as the result of the distension of lymph spaces and vessels
(_lymphangiectasis_); and in lymphangiomas, of which the best-known
This term is applied to a cyst filled with a clear colourless jelly or
the dorsal aspect of the carpus, usually towards its radial side (Fig. 60).
It is situated over one of the intercarpal or other joints in this
The skin and fascia are movable over the cyst. The cyst varies in size
from a pea to a pigeon's egg, and usually attains its maximum size
learning gymnastics. It may cause no symptoms or it may interfere with
the palmar aspect of the wrist.
[Illustration: FIG. 60.--Carpal Ganglion in a woman aet. 25.]
The _tarsal ganglion_ is situated on the dorsum of the foot over one or
other of the intertarsal joints. It is usually smaller, flatter, and
more tense than that met with over the wrist, so that it is sometimes
mistaken for a bony tumour. It rarely causes symptoms, unless so
situated as to be pressed upon by the boot.
_Ganglia in the region of the knee_ are usually situated over the
of the joint in front of the tendon of the biceps (Fig. 61). The
occupations or who indulge in athletics, and they cause stiffness,
bone of the great toe and may be the cause of considerable suffering; it
is indistinguishable from the thickened and enlarged bursa so commonly
present in this situation in the condition known as bunion.
woman.]
Ganglionic cysts are met with in other situations than those mentioned,
but they are so rare as not to require separate description.
_Pathological Anatomy._--The wall of the cyst is composed of fibrous
tissue closely adherent to or fused with the surrounding tissues, so
degeneration from the surrounding connective tissue. In the region of
the knee the ganglion is usually multilocular, and consists of a
meshwork of fibrous tissue, the meshes of which are occupied by colloid
material.
of the synovial membrane of a joint or tendon sheath. We have not been
able to demonstrate any communication between the cavity of the cyst
and that of an adjacent tendon sheath or joint. It is possible, however,
that the cyst may originate from a minute portion of synovial membrane
being protruded and strangulated so that it becomes disconnected from
peri-articular tissues, resulting from colloid degeneration of the
small areas which later coalesce. Ganglia are probably, therefore, of
the nature of degeneration cysts arising in the capsule of joints, in
tendons, and in their sheaths.
_Treatment._--A ganglion can usually be got rid of by a modification of
the old-fashioned seton. The skin and cyst wall are transfixed by a
stout needle carrying a double thread of silkworm gut; some of the
colourless jelly escapes from the punctures; the ends of the thread are
tied and cut short, and a dressing is applied. A week later the threads
tissue, which undergoes the usual conversion into scar tissue. If the
cyst re-forms, it should be removed by open dissection under local
anaesthesia. Puncture with a tenotomy knife and scraping the interior,
and the injection of irritants, are alternative, but less satisfactory,
methods of treatment.
the observation that the small tumour is cystic, and that it follows the
movements of the tendon. The cyst is at first multiple, but the
so weakened that it readily ruptures. The best treatment is to resect
the affected segment of tendon.
The so-called "compound palmar ganglion" is a tuberculous disease of the
INJURIES
    _Wounds by rifle bullets_; _Wounds received in warfare_; _Shell
    wounds_. _Embedded foreign bodies_--BURNS AND
    SCALDS--INJURIES PRODUCED BY ELECTRICITY: _X-ray and
    radium_; _Electrical burns_; _Lightning stroke_.
CONTUSIONS
without solution of continuity of the skin. When the integument gives
way at the same time, a _contused-wound_ results. Bruising occurs when
force is applied to a part by means of a blunt object, whether as a
direct blow, a crush, or a grazing form of violence. If the force acts
remember that those who suffer from scurvy, or haemophilia (bleeders),
and fat and anaemic females, are liable to be bruised by comparatively
trivial injuries.
_Clinical Features._--The less severe forms of contusion are associated
with _ecchymosis_, numerous minute and discrete punctate haemorrhages
The more severe forms are attended with _extravasation_, the
the orbit, the scrotum and perineum, and on the chest wall. A blue or
the instrument employed. It is most intense in regions where the skin is
naturally thin and pigmented. In parts where the extravasated blood is
only separated from the oxygen of the air by a thin layer of epidermis
points are often well illustrated in cases of black eye, where the blood
is almost black. In severe contusions associated with great tension of
the skin--for example, over the front of the tibia or around the
avenue of infection. When deeply situated, the blood tends to spread
gravity, passing under fasciae, between muscles, along the sheaths of
vessels, or in connective-tissue spaces, so that it may only reach the
injury. This fact is sometimes of importance in diagnosis, as, for
example, in certain fractures of the base of the skull, where
process some days after the accident.
resistant, doughy swelling, in which there may be elicited on deep
It frequently happens that, from the tearing of lymph vessels, serous
fluid is extravasated, and a _lymphatic_ or _serous cyst_ may form.
In all contusions accompanied by extravasation, there is marked swelling
of the area involved, as well as pain and tenderness. The temperature
may rise to 101 o F., or, in the large extravasations that occur in
the testicle, abdomen, or head, and occasionally marked nervous
Contusion of muscles or nerves may produce partial atrophy and paresis,
as is often seen after injuries in the region of the shoulder.
In alcoholic or other debilitated patients, suppuration is liable to
the blood, or through the overlying skin.
_Terminations of Contusions._--The usual termination is a complete
return to the normal, some of the extravasated blood being organised,
but most of it being reabsorbed. During the process characteristic
alterations in the colour of the effused blood take place as a result of
changes in the blood pigment. In from twenty-four to forty-eight hours
the margins of the blue area become of a violet hue, and as time goes on
the discoloured area increases in size, and becomes successively green,
yellow, and lemon-coloured at its margins, the central part being the
last to change. The rate at which this play of colours proceeds is so
variable, and depends on so many circumstances, that no time-limits can
be laid down. During the disintegration of the effused blood the
found to be pigmented. Sometimes the blood persists as a collection of
fluid with a newly formed connective-tissue capsule, constituting a
_haematoma_ or _blood cyst_, more often met with in the scalp than in
other parts.
The impairment of the blood supply of the skin may lead to the formation
in bleeders, and when the slough separates the blood-clot is exposed and
and lead to the formation of an abscess as a result of direct infection
from the skin or through the circulation.
_Treatment._--If the patient is seen immediately after the accident,
of blood. Ice-bags and evaporating lotions are to be used with caution,
to necrosis of the skin.
When extravasation has already taken place, massage is the most speedy
and efficacious means of dispersing the effused blood. The part should
be massaged several times a day, unless the presence of blebs or
abrasions of the skin prevents this being done. When this is the case,
to promote healing, after which massage is employed.
of the skin, incisions may be made, if asepsis can be assured. The blood
from a haematoma may be withdrawn by an exploring needle, and the
WOUNDS
A wound is a solution in the continuity of the skin or mucous membrane
and of the underlying tissues, caused by violence.
Three varieties of wounds are described: incised, punctured, and
contused and lacerated.
#Incised Wounds.#--Typical examples of incised wounds are those made by
by cutting instruments, and suicidal cut-throat wounds. It should be
borne in mind in connection with medico-legal inquiries, that wounds of
the patella, although, inflicted by a blunt instrument, may have all the
appearances of incised wounds.
_Clinical Features._--One of the characteristic features of an incised
wound is its tendency to gape. This is evident in long skin wounds, and
especially when the cut runs across the part, or when it extends deeply
gaping of a wound, further, is more marked when the underlying tissues
are in a state of tension--as, for example, in inflamed parts. Incised
wounds in the palm of the hand, the sole of the foot, or the scalp,
however, have little tendency to gape, because of the close attachment
The _special risks_ of incised wounds are: (1) division of large blood
vessels, leading to profuse haemorrhage; (2) division of nerve-trunks,
resulting in motor and sensory disturbances; and (3) division of tendons
_Treatment._--If haemorrhage is still going on, it must be arrested by
interferes with union. If necessary, the wound should be purified by
washing with saline solution or eusol, and the surrounding skin painted
with iodine, after which the edges are approximated by sutures. The raw
no inversion of the cutaneous surface takes place. In extensive and deep
wounds, to ensure more complete closure and to prevent subsequent
stretching of the scar, it is advisable to unite the different
of _buried sutures_ of catgut or other absorbable material. For the
approximation of the skin edges, stitches of horse-hair, fishing-gut, or
parts, stitch marks may be avoided by approximating the edges with
strips of gauze fixed in position by collodion, or by subcutaneous
neck, on the limbs, or in the scrotum, the use of Michel's clips is
advantageous in so far as these bring the deep surfaces of the skin into
leave only a slight mark if removed within forty-eight hours.
wide of the margins, to take the strain off the coaptation stitches.
Stout silk, fishing-gut, or silver wire may be employed for this
purpose. When the tension is extreme, Lister's button suture may be
it freely with a sharp knife. Relaxation stitches should be removed in
four or five days, and stitches of coaptation in from seven to ten days.
On the face and neck, wounds heal rapidly, and stitches may be removed
_Drainage._--In wounds in which no cavity has been left, and in which
there is no reason to suspect infection, drainage is unnecessary. When,
the best drains; but where it is desirable to leave little mark, a few
substitute. Except when infection occurs, the drain is removed in from
instruments, and the sharper and smoother the instrument the more does
the resulting injury resemble an incised wound; while from more rounded
and rougher instruments the edges of the wound are more or less contused
or lacerated. The depth of punctured wounds greatly exceeds their width,
and the damage to subcutaneous parts is usually greater than that to the
instrument is a rough one, these conditions may be reversed by its
than externally.
The _risks_ incident to this class of wounds are: (1) the extreme
difficulty, especially when a dense fascia has been perforated, of
and of the way in which the surface wound closes on the withdrawal of
cavity, such as the abdomen, thorax, or skull, materially adds to the
danger.
wound, and to remove any foreign body or blood-clot that may be in it.
fasciae, paring away bruised tissues, and purifying the whole
wound-surface. Any blood vessel that is punctured should be cut across
and tied; and divided muscles, tendons, or nerves must be sutured. After
haemorrhage has been arrested, iodoform and bismuth paste is rubbed into
the raw surface, and the wound closed. If there is any reason to doubt
the asepticity of the wound, it is better treated by the open method,
and a Bier's bandage should be applied.
they so occur in practice. They are produced by crushing, biting, or
tearing forms of violence--such as result from machinery accidents,
firearms, or the bites of animals. In addition to the irregular wound of
beneath and around, and the subcutaneous lesions are much wider than
portions of skin, muscle, or tendon completely torn away.
The _special risks_ of these wounds are: (1) Sloughing of the bruised
tissues, especially when attempts to sterilise the wound have not been
ensuing in the wound. (4) Loss of muscle or tendon, interfering with
motion. (5) Cicatricial contraction. (6) Gangrene, which may follow
lacerated wounds, leaving unsightly, pigmented scars. This is often seen
by removing all gross dirt from the edges of the wound.
_Treatment._--In severe wounds of this class implicating the
the limb can be saved. In examining the limb, attention should first be
directed to the state of the main blood vessels, in order to determine
if the vascular supply of the part beyond the lesion is sufficient to
maintain its vitality. Amputation is usually called for if there is
complete absence of pulsation in the distal arteries and if the part
addition, there is extensive destruction of large muscular masses or of
important tendons, or comminution of the bones, amputation is usually
imperative. Stripping of large areas of skin is not in itself a reason
for removing a limb, as much can be done by skin grafting, but when it
is associated with other lesions it favours amputation. In considering
these points, it must be borne in mind that the damage to the deeper
tissues is always more extensive than appears on the surface, and that
doubtful cases the possibility of rendering the parts aseptic will often
upper extremity which would be unjustifiable in the case of a lower
limb. The age and occupation of the patient must also be taken into
It having been decided to try and save the limb, the question is only
settled for the moment; it may have to be reconsidered from day to day,
or even from hour to hour, according to the progress of the case.
When it is decided to make the attempt to save the limb, the wound must
become engrained should be cut away with knife or scissors. The raw
solution followed by methylated spirit, and rubbed all over with "bipp"
paste. If the purification is considered satisfactory the wound may be
WOUNDS BY FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
referred to works on military surgery. Experience has shown that the
different campaigns, and even in different fields of the same campaign.
Slight variations in the size, shape, and weight of rifle bullets, for
example, may profoundly modify the lesions they produce: witness the
destructive effect of the pointed bullet compared with that of the
conical form previously used. The conditions under which the fighting is
long-range fighting of the South African campaign of 1899-1902 were very
different from those met with in the entrenched warfare in France in
1914-1918. It has been found also that the infective complications are
greatly influenced by the terrain in which the fighting takes place. In
the dry, sandy, uncultivated veldt of South Africa, bullet wounds seldom
Belgium were almost invariably contaminated with putrefactive organisms,
and gaseous gangrene and tetanus were common complications. It has been
found also that wounds inflicted in naval engagements present different
characters from those sustained on land. Many other factors, such as the
first aid, and the transport arrangements, also play a part in
determining the nature and condition of the wounds that have to be dealt
with by military surgeons.
Whatever the nature of the weapon concerned, the wound is of the
_punctured, contused, and lacerated_ variety. Its severity depends on
weapon is discharged, and the part of the body struck.
Shock is a prominent feature, but its degree, as well as the time of its
onset, varies with the extent and seat of the injury, and with the
mental state of the patient when wounded. We have observed pronounced
shock in children after being shot even when no serious injury was
which is variously described as being like the lash of a whip, a blow
later it may become severe, and is usually associated with intense
thirst, especially when much blood has been lost.
In all forms of wounds sustained in warfare, septic infection
streptococci. The presence of anaerobic organisms introduces the
The earlier the wound is disinfected the greater is the possibility of
diminishing this risk. If cleansing is carried out within the first six
hours the chance of eliminating sepsis is good; with every succeeding
six hours it diminishes, until after twenty-four hours it is seldom
The presence of a metallic foreign body having been determined and its
position localised by means of the X-rays, all devitalised and
fragments of clothing, gravel and blood-clot, removed, the wound
circumstances.
#Pistol-shot Wounds.#--Wounds inflicted by pistols, revolvers, and small
air-guns are of frequent occurrence in civil practice, the weapon being
skin or lying loose on the surface, the greater the range the wider
being the area of spread. When black powder is used, the embedded grains
weapon is placed in contact with the skin, the subcutaneous tissues are
lacerated over an area of two or three inches around the opening made by
the bullet and smoke and powder-staining and scorching are more marked
than at longer ranges.
When the bullet perforates, the exit wound is usually larger and more
extensively lacerated than the wound of entrance. Its margins are as a
Pistol wounds only produce dangerous effects when fired at close range,
and when the cavities of the skull, the thorax, or the abdomen are
pistols of the "toy" order. These injuries will be described with
regional surgery.
import apart from the risk of haemorrhage and of infection.
purifying the wounds of entrance and exit and the surrounding skin, and
There being no urgency for the removal of the bullet, time should be
taken to have it localised by the X-rays, preferably by stereoscopic
plates. In some cases it is not necessary to remove the bullet.
which makes a single ragged wound having much the appearance of that
the muzzle the pellets begin to disperse so that there are separate
punctures around the main central wound. As the range increases, these
outlying punctures make a wider and wider pattern, until at a distance
of from eighteen to twenty feet from the muzzle, the scattering is
complete, there is no longer any central wound, and each individual
possible, from the features of the wound, to arrive at an approximately
suicide, or murder.
struck it is shattered, and portions of bone may be displaced or even
When the charge impinges over one of the large cavities of the body, the
shot may scatter widely through the contained viscera, and there is
charge and possibly fragments of bone, will penetrate the pleura, and be
dispersed throughout the lung; in the head, the skull may be shattered
size and shape of the wound; the entrance wound is increased in size and
[Illustration: FIG. 62.--Radiogram showing Pellets embedded in Arm.
(Mr. J. W. Dowden's case.)]
tendons, and ligaments than a single bullet, which in many cases pushes
such structures aside without dividing them. In the abdomen and chest,
also, the damage done by a full charge of shot is much more extensive
leading to a greater number of perforations of the intestine and more
widespread laceration of solid viscera.
often have the opportunity of observing that the exit wound is larger,
more ragged than that of entrance, and that its edges are everted; the
extensive tearing and bruising of all the tissues, including the bones,
and the marked tendency to early and progressive septic infection,
At a range of from twenty to thirty feet, although the scatter is
complete, the pellets are still close together, so that if they
encounter the shaft of a long bone, even the femur, they fracture the
bone across, often along with some longitudinal splintering.
Individual pellets striking the shafts of long bones become flattened or
distorted, and when cancellated bone is struck they become embedded in
The skin, when it is closely peppered with shot, is liable to lose its
eye may be seriously injured by a single pellet.
Small shot fired at longer ranges--over about a hundred and fifty
feet--usually go through the skin, but seldom pierce the fascia, and lie
embedded in the subcutaneous tissue, from which they can readily be
wound; but if it curls up or turns on its side, it is usually deflected
and flies clear of the shot. It may make a separate wound.
prevention of septic infection. There is rarely any urgency in the
removal of pellets from the tissues.
#Wounds by Rifle Bullets.#--The vast majority of wounds inflicted by
accidentally, however, during range practice for example, and may then
It is only necessary here to consider the effects of modern small-bore
effect there is not much difference between the various high velocity
bullets used in different armies; they will kill up to a distance of two
grooves in the rifle, and to prevent it stripping as it passes through
the barrel. It also increases the penetrating power of the missile, but
diminishes its "stopping" power, unless a vital part or a long bone is
to expand or "mushroom" when it strikes the body, and its stopping power
severe. These "soft-nosed" expanding bullets are to be distinguished
from "explosive" bullets which contain substances which detonate on
in the pocket, or the core and the case separating--"stripping" of the
pass through the skin and lodge in the subcutaneous tissue, or may even
A blank cartridge fired at close range may cause a severe wound, and, if
charged with black powder, may leave a permanent bluish-black
pigmentation of the skin.
necessary to indicate briefly the method of dealing with gunshot wounds
1. _On the Field._--Haemorrhage is arrested in the limbs by an improvised
tourniquet; in the head by a pad and bandage; in the thorax or abdomen
favours septic infection. If a limb is all but detached it should be
completely severed. A full dose of morphin is given hypodermically. The
ampoule of iodine carried by the wounded man is broken, and its contents
are poured over and around the wound, after which the field dressing is
applied. In extensive wounds, the "shell-dressing" carried by the
stretcher bearers is preferred. All bandages are applied loosely to
allow for subsequent swelling. The fragments of fractured bones are
immobilised by some form of emergency splint.
2. _At the Advanced Dressing Station_, after the patient has had a
dose of anti-tetanic serum is injected. The tourniquet is removed and
the wound inspected. Urgent amputations are performed. Moribund patients
are detained lest they die _en route_.
3. _In the Field Ambulance or Casualty Clearing Station_ further
measures are employed for the relief of shock, and urgent operations are
cases the main object is to guard against infection; the skin is
disinfected over a wide area and surrounded with towels; damaged tissue,
bodies are extracted. Torn blood vessels, and, if possible, nerves and
made for free drainage, or some special method of irrigation, such as
that of Carrel, is adopted. Sometimes the wound is treated with bismuth,
4. _In the Base Hospital or Hospital Ship_ various measures may be
called for according to the progress of the wound and the condition of
the patient.
#Shell Wounds and Wounds produced by Explosions.#--It is convenient to
ordnance and those resulting in the course of blasting operations from
met with in civil practice.
Wounds inflicted by shell fragments and shrapnel bullets tend to be
of the tissues. The missiles frequently lodge and carry portions of the
Shell wounds are attended with a considerable degree of shock. On
performed some distance above the torn tissues, as there is considerable
risk of sloughing of the flaps.
Wounds produced by dynamite explosions and the bursting of boilers have
the same general characters as shell wounds. Fragments of stone, coal,
infective complications.
contused and lacerated wounds.
In the course of many operations foreign substances are introduced into
the tissues and intentionally left there, for example, suture and
ligature materials, steel or aluminium plates, silver wire or ivory pegs
Foreign bodies may also lodge in accidentally inflicted wounds, for
example, bullets, needles, splinters of wood, or fragments of clothing.
embedded in the tissues. As a result of explosions, particles of carbon,
in the form of coal-dust or gunpowder, or portions of shale, may lodge
reaction in the tissues in which it lodges, in the form of hyperaemia,
granulation tissue. The subsequent changes depend upon whether or not
the wound is infected with pyogenic bacteria. If it is so infected,
suppuration ensues, a sinus forms, and persists until the foreign body
If the wound is aseptic, the fate of the foreign body varies with its
character. A substance that is absorbable, such as catgut or fine silk,
is surrounded and permeated by the phagocytes, which soften and
disintegrate it, the debris being gradually absorbed in much the same
manner as a fibrinous exudate. Minute bodies that are not capable of
being absorbed, such as particles of carbon, or of pigment used in
tattooing, are taken up by the phagocytes, and in course of time
removed. Larger bodies, such as needles or bullets, which are not
capable of being destroyed by the phagocytes, become encapsulated. In
the granulation tissue by which they are surrounded large multinuclear
tissue is eventually formed around the body. The tissues of the capsule
may show evidence of iron pigmentation. Sometimes fluid accumulates
around a foreign body within its capsule, constituting a cyst.
Substances like paraffin, strands of silk used to bridge a gap in a
cause trouble, either as a result of infective complications, or by
inducing the formation of a mass of inflammatory tissue around them,
which may simulate a gumma, a tuberculous focus, or a sarcoma. This
latter condition may give rise to difficulties in diagnosis,
particularly if there is no history forthcoming of the entrance of the
foreign body. The ignorance of patients regarding the possible lodgment
remarkable. In such cases the X-rays will reveal the presence of the
foreign body if it is sufficiently opaque to cast a shadow. The heavy,
lead-containing varieties of glass throw very definite shadows little
Foreign bodies encapsulated in the peritoneal cavity are specially
dangerous, as the proximity of the intestine furnishes a constant
possibility of infection.
The question of removal of the foreign body must be decided according to
the conditions present in individual cases; in searching for a foreign
The distinction between a burn which results from the action of dry heat
moist heat, has no clinical significance.
the nature of burns. In old people with enfeebled circulation mere
exposure to a strong fire may cause severe degrees of burning, the
feet, legs, or knees of persons while intoxicated who have fallen asleep
before the fire.
The damage done to the tissues by strong caustics, such as fuming nitric
those resulting from heat. Electricity and the Rontgen rays also produce
lesions of the nature of burns.
_Pathology of Burns._--Much discussion has taken place regarding the
explanation of the rapidly fatal issue in extensive superficial burns.
cells of the tubules of the kidneys; (3) minute thrombi and
extravasations throughout the tissues of the body; (4) degeneration of
with where the presence of a toxin is known to produce them, that in all
classification of burns is that of Dupuytren, which is based upon the
depth of the lesion. Six degrees are thus, recognised: (1) hyperaemia or
total destruction of the true skin; (5) charring of muscles; (6)
illustrate more than one of these degrees, the deeper forms always being
associated with those less deep, and the clinical picture is made up of
the combined characters of all. A burn is classified in terms of its
severity of a burn usually prove to be greater than at first sight
_Burns of the first degree_ are associated with erythema of the skin,
due to hyperaemia of its blood vessels, and result from scorching by
exposure to the sun's rays. They are characterised clinically by acute
exposure to the heat of the fire.
characterised by the occurrence of vesicles or blisters which are
scattered over the hyperaemic area, and contain a clear yellowish or
pyogenic bacteria are invariably present in these blisters. Burns of the
second degree leave no scar but frequently a persistent discoloration.
In rare instances the burned area becomes the seat of a peculiar
overgrowth of fibrous tissue of the nature of keloid (p 401).
_Burns of Third Degree--Partial Destruction of the Skin._--The epidermis
and papillae are destroyed in patches, leaving hard, dry, and insensitive
intense, but passes off during the first or second day, to return again,
however, when, about the end of a week, the sloughs separate and expose
the nerve filaments of the underlying skin. Granulations spring up to
fill the gap, and are rapidly covered by epithelium, derived partly from
become of a greyish-white colour, and ultimately blend with one another
but otherwise exhibits little tendency to contract and cause deformity.
_Burns of Fourth Degree--Total Destruction of the Skin._--These follow
the more prolonged action of any form of intense heat. Large, black, dry
less degree. Infection is liable to occur and to lead to wide
destruction of the surrounding skin. The amount of granulation tissue
necessary to fill the gap is therefore great; and as the epithelial
completely destroyed--the healing process is slow. The resulting scars
are irregular, deep and puckered, and show a great tendency to contract.
Keloid frequently develops in such cicatrices. When situated in the
region of the face, neck, or flexures of joints, much deformity and
impairment of function may result (Fig. 63).
In _burns of the fifth degree_ the lesion extends through the
subcutaneous tissue and involves the muscles; while in those of the
_sixth degree_ it passes still more deeply and implicates the bones.
produced by prolonged contact with hot metal or caustics. Burns of the
fifth and sixth degrees are met with in epileptics or intoxicated
persons who fall into the fire. Large blood vessels, nerve-trunks,
a severe burn into three periods; but it is to be observed that the
features characteristic of the periods have been greatly modified since
during which time the patient remains in a more or less profound state
When the injury proves fatal during this period, death is due to shock,
in the burned tissues. In fatal cases there is often evidence of
cerebral congestion and oedema.
The _second period_ begins when the shock passes off, and lasts till the
and congestive or inflammatory conditions of internal organs, giving
rise to such clinical complications as bronchitis, broncho-pneumonia, or
the infection, as they have become less frequent and less severe since
congestion of the kidneys. In burns implicating the face, neck, mouth,
or pharynx, oedema of the glottis is a dangerous complication, entailing
as it does the risk of suffocation.
The _third period_ begins when the sloughs separate, usually between
duration depending upon the size, depth, and asepticity of the raw area.
The chief causes of death during this period are toxin absorption in any
commonly erysipelas, tetanus, or other diseases due to infection by
The _prognosis_ in burns depends on (1) the superficial extent, and, to
a much less degree, the depth of the injury. When more than one-third of
the entire surface of the body is involved, even in a mild degree, the
prognosis is grave. (2) The situation of the burn is important. Burns
referred to. (3) Children are more liable to succumb to shock during the
early period, but withstand prolonged suppuration better than adults.
(4) When the patient survives the shock, the presence or absence of
infection is the all-important factor in prognosis.
#Treatment.#--The _general treatment_ consists in combating the shock.
to enable the purification to be carried out thoroughly. After carefully
removing the clothing, the whole of the burned area is gently, but
thoroughly, cleansed with peroxide of hydrogen or warm boracic lotion,
followed by sterilised saline solution. As pyogenic bacteria are
invariably found in the blisters of burns, these must be opened and the
raised epithelium removed.
indications: the relief of pain; the prevention of sepsis; and the
promotion of cicatrisation.
An application which satisfactorily fulfils these requirements is
made up of picric acid, 1 1/2 drams; absolute alcohol, 3 ounces;
distilled water, 40 ounces, and applied over the whole of the reddened
area. These are covered with antiseptic wool, _without_ any waterproof
covering, and retained in position by a many-tailed bandage. The
the temperature chart, any portion of the original dressing which
remains perfectly dry being left undisturbed. The value of a general
anaesthetic in dressing extensive burns, especially in children, can
scarcely be overestimated.
Picric acid yields its best results in superficial burns, and it is
and a granulating surface forms, the ordinary treatment for a healing
sore is instituted. Any slough under which pus has collected should be
cut away with scissors to permit of free drainage.
An occlusive dressing of melted _paraffin_ has also been employed. A
cent., and beta-naphthol 1/4 per cent. It has a melting point of 48 o C.
It is also known as _Ambrine_ and _Burnol_. After the burned area has
been cleansed and thoroughly dried, it is sponged or painted with the
melted paraffin, and before solidification takes place a layer of
paraffin. Further coats of paraffin are applied every other day to
prevent the gauze sticking to the skin.
An alternative method of treating extensive burns is by immersing the
renewed.
If a burn is already infected when first seen, it is to be treated on
the same principles as govern the treatment of other infected wounds.
ointments, and all substances like collodion and dry powders, which
retain discharges, entirely fail to meet the indications for the
rational treatment of burns, and should be abandoned.
Skin-grafting is of great value in hastening healing after extensive
which are so liable to develop from contraction of the cicatrices are
treated on general principles. In the region of the face, neck, and
flexures of joints (Fig. 63), where they are most marked, the contracted
bands may be divided and the parts stretched, the raw surface left being
covered by Thiersch grafts or by flaps of skin raised from adjacent
INJURIES PRODUCED BY ELECTRICITY
#Injuries produced by Exposure to X-Rays and Radium.#--In the routine
tissues, even when the greatest care is exercised as to dosage and
frequency of application. Robert Knox describes the following
ill-effects.
_Acute dermatitis_ varying in degree from a slight erythema to deep
are reproduced, but if the reaction is excessive permanent alopecia may
result.
_Chronic dermatitis_, which results from persistence of the acute form,
is most intractable and may assume malignant characters. X-ray warts are
a late manifestation of chronic dermatitis and may become malignant.
induced in X-ray workers who are imperfectly protected from the effects
of the rays.
#Electrical burns# usually occur in those who are engaged in industrial
The more superficial degrees of electrical burns differ from those
produced by heat in being almost painless, and in healing very slowly,
although as a rule they remain dry and aseptic.
which is not only more profound, but also lasts much longer than the
shock in an ordinary burn of corresponding severity. The parts at the
point of entrance of the current are charred to a greater or lesser
depth. The eschar is at first dry and crisp, and is surrounded by a zone
of pallor. For the first thirty-six to forty-eight hours there is
purification, a slow form of moist gangrene sets in, and the slough
spreads both in area and in depth, until the muscles and often the
large blood vessels and nerves are exposed. A line of demarcation
haemorrhage from erosion of large vessels.
_Treatment._--Electrical burns are treated on the same lines as ordinary
with a view to avoiding the onset of moist gangrene. After granulations
proves instantly fatal. In non-fatal cases the patient suffers from a
profound degree of shock, and there may or may not be any external
resembling those of urticaria--may appear on the body, but they usually
fade again in the course of twenty-four hours. Sometimes large patches
of skin are scorched or stained, the discoloured area showing an
corresponding to those of a superficial burn produced by heat. The chief
difference from ordinary burns is the extreme slowness with which
healing takes place. Localised paralysis of groups of muscles, or even
of a whole limb, may follow any degree of lightning-stroke. Treatment is
mainly directed towards combating the shock, the surface-lesions being
CHAPTER XII
METHODS OF WOUND TREATMENT
    prevent infection of wounds: _heat_; _chemical antiseptics_;
    infection: _purification_; _open-wound method_.
The surgeon is called upon to treat two distinct classes of wounds: (1)
those resulting from injury or disease in which _the skin is already
broken_, or in which a communication with a mucous surface exists; and
mucous surface being involved.
Infection by bacteria must be assumed to have taken place in all wounds
is based. Pathogenic bacteria are so widely distributed, that in the
ordinary circumstances of everyday life, no matter how trivial a wound
organisms to it is almost certain unless preventive measures are
employed.
It cannot be emphasised too strongly that rigid precautions are to be
lesions that are already infected. Any laxity in our methods which
risk.
clothing that may have come in contact with the wound, or from his own
skin. Or, again, the hands of those who render first aid, the water used
to bathe the wound, the handkerchief or other extemporised dressing
applied to it, may be the means of conveying bacterial infection. Should
the organisms constantly present in such situations are liable to prove
agents of infection.
Even after the patient has come under professional care the risks of his
his instruments, dressings, or other appliances may all, unless
purified, become the sources of infection.
In the case of an operation carried out through unbroken skin, organisms
may be introduced into the wound from the patient's own skin, from the
things used in the course of the operation, or from the dressings
applied to the wound.
Further, bacteria may gain access to devitalised tissues by way of the
blood-stream, being carried hither from some infected area elsewhere in
the body.
_The Antiseptic System of Surgery._--Those who only know the surgical
conditions of to-day can scarcely realise the state of matters which
existed before the introduction of the antiseptic system by Joseph
operations, and such diseases as erysipelas, pyaemia, and "hospital
fractures, amputations, and many other operations was appalling, and
death from blood-poisoning frequently followed even the most trivial
operations. An operation was looked upon as a last resource, and the
inherent risk from blood-poisoning seemed to have set an impassable
owe it that this barrier was removed. Having satisfied himself that the
septic process was due to bacterial infection, he devised a means of
by its use in compound fractures he soon obtained results such as had
never before been attained. The principle was applied to other
conditions with like success, and so profoundly has it affected the
whole aspect of surgical pathology, that many of the infective diseases
with which surgeons formerly had to deal are now all but unknown. The
broad principles upon which Lister founded his system remain unchanged,
although the methods employed to put them into practice have been
#Means taken to Prevent Infection of Wounds.#--The avenues by which
so wide, that it requires the greatest care and the most watchful
attention on the part of the surgeon to guard them all. It is only by
operating room and at the bedside, that the carrying out of surgical
indicate the chief directions in which danger lies, and to describe the
means most generally adopted to avoid it.
To prevent infection, it is essential that everything which comes into
contact with a wound should be sterilised or disinfected, and to ensure
#Sterilisation by Heat.#--The most reliable, and at the same time the
most convenient and generally applicable, means of sterilisation is by
sterilised are enclosed in a perforated tin casket, which is placed in a
apparatus is so arranged that the steam circulates under a pressure of
from two to three atmospheres, and permeates everything contained in it.
Objects so sterilised are dry when removed from the steriliser. This
method is specially suitable for appliances which are not damaged by
metal instruments; it is essential that the efficiency of the steriliser
means.
The best substitute for circulating steam is _boiling_. The articles are
placed in a "fish-kettle steriliser" and boiled for fifteen minutes in a
disinfected and protected by sterilised gloves.
the patient, the hands of the surgeon, and knives and other instruments
that are damaged by heat, recourse must be had to chemical agents.
These, however, are less reliable than heat, and are open to certain
the most likely sources of wound infection is the hands of the surgeon
pure, and that this source of wound infection can be reduced to a
minimum. The risk of infection from this source has further been greatly
reduced by the systematic use of rubber gloves by house-surgeons,
dressers, and nurses. The habitual use of gloves has also been adopted
by the great majority of surgeons; the minority, who find they are
handicapped by wearing gloves as a routine measure, are obliged to do so
when operating in infective cases or dressing infected wounds, and in
making rectal and vaginal examinations.
The gloves may be sterilised by steam, and are then put on dry, or by
overall, and the gloved hands are rinsed in lotion before and at
putting on the gloves, preferably by a method which dehydrates the skin.
Cotton gloves may be worn by the surgeon when tying ligatures, or
between operations, and by the anaesthetist during operations on the
running water as hot as can be borne, and a loofah or nail-brush, that
methylated spirit to dehydrate the skin, and then for two or three
minutes in 70 per cent. sublimate or biniodide alcohol (1 in 1000).
#Preparation of the Skin of the Patient.#--In the purification of the
in the mechanical removal of dirt and grease by the same means as are
taken for the cleansing of the surgeon's hands. Hair-covered parts
should be shaved. The skin is then dehydrated by washing with methylated
then covered with pads of dry sterilised gauze or a sterilised towel.
Immediately before the operation the skin is again purified in the same
way.
The _iodine method_ of disinfecting the skin introduced by Grossich is
methylated spirit, and then painted with a 5 per cent. solution of
iodine in rectified spirit. The painting with iodine is repeated just
final application is omitted in the case of children. In emergency
is an advantage, as it enables the operator to recognise the area that
has been prepared.
If any acne pustules or infected sinuses are present, they should be
destroyed or purified by means of the thermo-cautery or pure carbolic
#Appliances used at Operation.#--_Instruments_ that are not damaged by
heat must be boiled in a fish-kettle or other suitable steriliser for
steriliser and placed on a sterilised towel within reach of the surgeon
or his assistant. Knives and instruments that are liable to be damaged
by heat should be purified by being soaked in pure cresol for a few
_Pads of Gauze_ sterilised by compressed circulating steam have almost
gauze, to one corner of which a piece of strong tape about a foot long
the caskets in which they are sterilised by means of sterilised forceps,
and handed direct to the surgeon. The assistant who attends to the swabs
should wear sterilised gloves.
_Ligatures and Sutures._--To avoid the risk of implanting infective
satisfactory: (1) The gut is soaked in juniper oil for at least a month;
the juniper oil is then removed by ether and alcohol, and the gut
preserved in 1 in 1000 solution of corrosive sublimate in alcohol
(Kocher). (2) The gut is placed in a brass receiver and boiled for
three-quarters of an hour in a solution consisting of 85 per cent.
absolute alcohol, 10 per cent. water, and 5 per cent. carbolic acid, and
is then stored in 90 per cent. alcohol. (3) Cladius recommends that the
catgut, just as it is bought from the dealers, be loosely rolled on a
spool, and then immersed in a solution of--iodine, 1 part; iodide of
potassium, 1 part; distilled water, 100 parts. At the end of eight days
catgut so prepared is increased if it is kept dry in a sterile vessel,
instead of being left indefinitely in the iodine solution. If
Salkindsohn's formula is used--tincture of iodine, 1 part; proof spirit,
15 parts--the gut can be kept permanently in the solution without
becoming brittle. To avoid contamination from the hands, catgut should
be removed from the bottle with aseptic forceps and passed direct to the
sublimate solution. It is then wound on spools with purified hands
protected by sterilised gloves, and kept in absolute alcohol. Before an
operation the silk is again boiled for ten minutes in the same solution,
the same way as silk.
along with the instruments. Horse-hair and fishing-gut may be sterilised
The field of operation is surrounded by sterilised towels, clipped to
overalls sterilised by steam. To avoid the risk of infection from dust,
his assistants may wear sterilised cotton caps. To obviate the risk of
talking or coughing in the vicinity of a wound, a simple mask may be
The risk of infection from the _air_ is now known to be very small, so
before or during an operation.
It has been shown that the presence of spectators increases the number
from air infection is greater than in private practice.
To facilitate primary union, all haemorrhage should be arrested, and the
accumulation of fluid in the wound prevented. When much oozing is
opening specially made for the purpose. In aseptic wounds the tube may
important to avoid a scar, the opening should be closed with a Michel's
be obliterated by buried sutures, or by so adjusting the dressing as to
bring its walls into apposition.
original dressing, which need not be interfered with for from seven to
employed for the dressing of wounds. _Double cyanide gauze_ may be used
desirable to leave the dressing undisturbed for ten days or more.
wounds treated by the open method.
surgical dressing, and various antiseptic agents may be added to it. Of
these, corrosive sublimate is the most generally used. Wood-wool
Pads of _sphagnum moss_, sterilised by heat, are highly absorbent, and
being economical are used when there is much discharge, and in cases
#Means adopted to combat Infection.#--As has already been indicated, the
In _recent injuries_ such as result from railway or machinery accidents,
Hair-covered parts should be shaved and the surrounding skin painted
chiselled away. Opinions differ as to the benefit derived from washing
able to resist the action of any organisms that may remain in them. All
are agreed, however, that free washing with normal salt solution is
useful in mechanically cleansing the injured parts. Peroxide of hydrogen
properties. Efficient drainage must be provided, and stitches should be
The best way in which to treat such wounds is by the _open method_. This
may be renewed at intervals until the wound is filled by granulations;
packing or for drainage-tubes.
If earth or street dirt has entered the wound, the surface may with
advantage be painted over with pure carbolic acid, as virulent
organisms, such as those of tetanus or spreading gangrene, are liable to
indicated.
CHAPTER XIII
SYNCOPE--SHOCK--COLLAPSE--FAT EMBOLISM--TRAUMATIC ASPHYXIA--DELIRIUM
    _Traumatic delirium_.
depending on different causes, bear a superficial resemblance to one
#Syncope or Fainting.#--Syncope is the result of a suddenly produced
anaemia of the brain from temporary weakening or arrest of the heart's
a dislocation or the incision of a whitlow; or in those who have rapidly
lost a considerable quantity of blood. It may also follow the sudden
ascites, or withdrawing fluid from the pleural cavity. Syncope sometimes
occurs also during the administration of a general anaesthetic,
especially if there is a tendency to sickness and the patient is not
recognised by the cessation of oozing from the divided vessels before
the general symptoms become manifest.
_Clinical Features._--When a person is about to faint he feels giddy,
has surging sounds in his ears, and haziness of vision; he yawns,
becomes pale and sick, and a free flow of saliva takes place into the
mouth. The pupils dilate; the pulse becomes small and almost
imperceptible; the respirations shallow and hurried; consciousness
actual faint. This is frequently seen in threatened syncopal attacks
during chloroform administration.
consciousness slowly returns. In some cases, however, syncope is fatal.
_Treatment._--The head should at once be lowered--in imitation of
patient, if necessary, being held up by the heels. All tight clothing,
stimulated reflexly by dashing cold water over the face or chest, or by
rubbing the face vigorously with a rough towel. The application of
volatile substances, such as ammonia or smelling-salts, to the nose; the
administration by the mouth of sal-volatile, whisky or brandy, and the
intra-muscular injection of ether, are the most speedily efficacious
#Surgical Shock.#--The condition known as surgical shock may be looked
the body for the transformation of energy. This mechanism consists of
(1) the _brain_, which, through certain special centres, regulates all
controls the tone of the blood vessels as to maintain efficient
glycogen as it is required by the muscles, and in addition, deals with
the by-products of metabolism.
and that these are identical, whatever be the cause that leads to the
exhaustion of the energy-transforming mechanism. These changes vary in
degree, and range from slight alterations in the structure of the
fear, anxiety, or worry, physical injury and toxic infection, and the
most potent, and the one which most concerns the surgeon, is physical
or anxiety (_emotional shock_), or with haemorrhage; and may be followed
The exaggerated afferent impulses reaching the brain as a result of
ventricle and cerebellum which maintain the muscular tone, with the
result that the muscular tone is diminished and there is a marked fall
is not oxygenated a condition of acidosis ensues.
The more highly the injured part is endowed with sensory nerves the more
a more intense degree of shock than a correspondingly severe crush of
the foot; and injuries of such specially innervated parts as the testis,
the urethra, the face, or the spinal cord, are associated with severe
degrees, as are also those of parts innervated from the sympathetic
system, such as the abdominal or thoracic viscera. It is to be borne in
impulses reaching the brain and causing shock during an operation. If
anaesthetic, however, the central nervous system is protected from these
While the aged frequently manifest but few signs of shock, they have a
suffer little, even after severe operations, others with much less cause
succumb to shock.
excitement of a railway accident or a conflagration,--even severe
the period of excitement is over, the severity of the shock is all the
greater. The same thing is observed in persons injured while under the
influence of alcohol.
_Clinical Features._--The patient is in a state of prostration. He is
roused from his condition of indifference with difficulty, but answers
fluttering, and often all but imperceptible at the wrist; the
hours, the _reaction_, as it is called, being often ushered in by
respiration deeper and more regular; the temperature rises to 100 o F. or
higher; and the patient begins to take notice of his surroundings. The
condition of neurasthenia which sometimes follows an operation may be
associated with the degenerative changes in nerve cells described by
Crile.
In certain cases the symptoms of traumatic shock blend with those
condition. The conditions formerly known as "delayed shock" and
"prostration with excitement" are now generally recognised to be due to
toxaemia.
operations should only be undertaken during profound shock when they are
imperatively demanded for the arrest of haemorrhage, the prevention of
infection of serous cavities, or for the relief of pain which is
producing or intensifying the condition.
_Prevention of Operation Shock._--In the preparation of a patient for
operation, drastic purgation and prolonged fasting must be avoided, and
about half an hour before a severe operation a pint of saline solution
should be slowly introduced into the rectum; this is repeated, if
necessary, during the operation, and at its conclusion. The
hot-bottles. All lotions used must be warm (100 o F.); and the operation
should be completed as speedily and as bloodlessly as possible. The
element of fear may to some extent be eliminated by the preliminary
"blocking" of the nerves by the injection of a 1 per cent. solution of
novocaine into their substance on the proximal side of the field of
operation. To prevent after-pain in abdominal wounds he recommends
injecting the edges with quinine and urea hydrochlorate before suturing,
the resulting anaesthesia lasting for twenty-four to forty-eight hours.
To these preventive measures the term _anoci-association_ has been
applied. In selecting an anaesthetic, it may be borne in mind that
chloroform lowers the blood pressure more than ether does, and that with
_Treatment._--A patient suffering from shock should be placed in the
blood to the brain. His bed should be placed near a large fire, and the
patient himself surrounded by cotton wool and blankets and hot-bottles.
and firmly bandaged from below upwards, to conserve as much of the
moderate in degree, as soon as the patient has been put to bed, about a
circulation is sufficiently restored. In severe cases, especially when
associated with haemorrhage, transfusion of whole blood from a compatible
contra-indicated in shock, as they merely exhaust the already impaired
critical period of shock, especially at the end of a severe operation.
about 105 o F. into a vein or into the subcutaneous tissue is useful
mouth, or by the introduction of saline solution into the rectum. Ice
only relieves thirst for a short time, and as it is liable to induce
the tongue may be relieved by swabbing the mouth with a mixture of
glycerine and lemon juice.
should be added, or heroin alone may be given in doses of 1/24th to
1/12th grain.
several hours. It is met with in the course of severe illnesses,
cholera; by persistent vomiting; or by profuse sweating, as in some
cases of heat-stroke. Severe degrees of collapse follow sudden and
profuse loss of blood.
Collapse often follows upon shock--for example, in intestinal
especially such as implicate the marrow of long bones--for example,
variable quantity. In the vast majority of cases no ill effects follow,
certain symptoms ensue, either immediately, or more frequently not for
In the lung the fat collects in the minute blood vessels and produces
cyanosis, a persistent cough and frothy or blood-stained sputum, a
When the fat lodges in the capillaries of the brain, the pulse becomes
small, rapid, and irregular, delirium followed by coma ensues, and the
condition is usually rapidly fatal.
his illness, until the fat is eliminated from the blood vessels.
under a fall of masonry, and in machinery accidents. When the patient is
released, the face and the neck as low down as the level of the
clavicles present an intense coloration, varying from deep purple to
countless minute reddish-blue or black spots, with small areas or
coloration is best recognised towards the periphery of the affected
dark patch meets the normal skin of the chest (Beach and Cobb). Pressure
over the skin does not cause the colour to disappear as in ordinary
cyanosis. It has been shown by Wright of Boston, that the coloration is
due to stasis from mechanical over-distension of the veins and
capillaries; actual extravasation into the tissues is exceptional. The
absence of functionating valves in the veins of the head and neck, so
veins they become engorged. Under the conjunctivae there are
changes which characterise a bruise. The sub-conjunctival ecchymosis,
extravasations. Apart from combating the shock, or dealing with
concomitant injuries, no treatment is called for.
Delirium is a temporary disturbance of mind which occurs in the course
be associated with any of the acute pyogenic infections; with
erysipelas, especially when it affects the head or face; or with chronic
infective diseases of the urinary organs. In the various forms of
meningitis also, and in some cases of injury to the head, it is common;
also, of course, be a symptom of insanity.
usually worst at night.
result of accident or operation, are suddenly compelled to lie in bed.
Although oftenest met with in habitual drunkards or chronic tipplers, it
children.
of the patient being laid up. For two or three days he refuses food, is
depressed, suspicious, sleepless and restless, demanding to be allowed
and to attempt to get out of bed. There is general muscular tremor, most
greatly distressed because of rats, mice, beetles, or snakes, which he
compressible; the temperature is only moderately raised (100 o-101 o F.),
and as a rule there is profuse sweating. The digestion is markedly
peculiarly insensitive to pain, and may even walk about with a fractured
In most cases the symptoms begin to pass off in three or four days; the
and death results from exhaustion.
The main indication in _treatment_ is to secure sleep, and this is done
by the administration of bromides, chloral, or paraldehyde, or of one or
(1/200 grain) injected hypodermically is found efficacious when all
other means have failed, but this drug must be used with great
discrimination. The patient must be encouraged to take plenty of easily
saline infusions.
A delirious patient must be constantly watched by a trained attendant or
others. Mechanical restraint is often necessary, but must be avoided if
patient. On account of the extreme restlessness, there is often great
difficulty in carrying out the proper treatment of the primary surgical
A form of delirium, sometimes spoken of as #Traumatic Delirium#, may
follow on severe injuries or operations in persons of neurotic
temperament, or in those whose nervous system is exhausted by overwork.
It is met with apart from alcoholic intemperance. This form of delirium
seems to be specially prone to ensue on operations on the face, the
thyreoid gland, or the genito-urinary organs. The symptoms appear in
from two to five days after the operation, and take the form of
restlessness, sleeplessness, low incoherent muttering, and picking at
the bedclothes. It is not necessarily attended by fever or by muscular
probably to be regarded as a form of insanity, as it is liable to merge
into mania or melancholia.
The _treatment_ is carried out on the same lines as that of delirium
tremens.
THE BLOOD VESSELS
    haemorrhage--Haemophilia--DISEASES OF BLOOD VESSELS:
    Thrombosis; Embolism--Arteritis: _Varieties_;
    _Varieties_--VARIX--ANGIOMATA--Naevus: _Varieties_;
    _Methods of treatment_--ANEURYSMS OF INDIVIDUAL ARTERIES.
_tunica intima_--made up of a single layer of endothelial cells lining
the lumen; outside of this a layer of delicate connective tissue; and
elastic fibres--the internal elastic lamina. The tunica intima is easily
ruptured. The middle coat, or _tunica media_, consists of non-striped
tissue, especially in the larger vessels. The thickness of the vessel
containing, especially in vessels of medium calibre, some yellow elastic
fibres in its deeper layers.
In most parts of the body the arteries lie in a sheath of connective
tissue, from which fine fibrous processes pass to the tunica externa.
The connection, however, is not a close one, and the artery when divided
of a definite membrane.
nerves, which regulate the size of the lumen by inducing contraction or
The _veins_ are constructed on the same general plan as the arteries,
the individual coats, however, being thinner. The inner coat is less
easily ruptured, and the middle coat contains a smaller proportion of
arteries--namely, in being provided with valves which prevent reflux of
The distension of these sinuses with blood closes the valve and
prevents regurgitation. Valves are absent from the superior and inferior
uterine, and spermatic veins, and from the veins in the lower part of
the rectum. They are ill-developed or absent also in the iliac and
common femoral veins--a fact which has an important bearing on the
cells.
HAEMORRHAGE
Various terms are employed in relation to haemorrhage, according to its
seat, its origin, the time at which it occurs, and other circumstances.
surface; when the bleeding takes place into the tissues or into a cavity
tissue, constituting an _extravasation_ of blood; or it may collect in a
space or cavity and form a _haematoma_.
as _melaena_; and the passage of bloody urine, as _haematuria_.
Haemorrhage is known as arterial, venous, or capillary, according to the
In _arterial_ haemorrhage the blood is bright red in colour, and escapes
from the cardiac end of the divided vessel in pulsating jets
impeded. When the heart's action is weak and the blood tension low the
divided artery at the bottom of a deep wound, escapes on the surface in
a steady flow.
_Venous_ bleeding is not pulsatile, but occurs in a continuous stream,
which, although both ends of the vessel may bleed, is more copious from
the distal end. The blood is dark red under ordinary conditions, but may
be purplish, or even black, if the respiration is interfered with. When
respiration produce a rise and fall in the stream which may resemble
surface of the wound in a steady ooze. This form of bleeding is serious
in those who are the subjects of haemophilia.
INJURIES OF ARTERIES
The following description of the injuries of arteries refers to the
included in the consideration of wounds and contusions.
#Contusion.#--An artery may be contused by a blow or crush, or by the
oblique impact of a bullet. The bruising of the vessel wall, especially
if it is diseased, may result in the formation of a thrombus which
occludes the lumen temporarily or even permanently, and in rare cases
may lead to gangrene of the limb beyond.
vessels are diseased. The rupture may be incomplete or complete.
is incomplete--the inner and middle coats being torn, while the outer
internal, because of its elasticity, curls up in the interior of the
vessel, forming a valvular obstruction to the blood-flow. In most cases
this results in the formation of a thrombus which occludes the vessel.
a time at least--owing to the occlusion of the vessel, and the limb
becomes cold and powerless. The pulsation seldom returns within five or
six weeks of the injury, if indeed it is not permanently arrested, but,
as a rule, a collateral circulation is rapidly established, sufficient
from without--for example, by haemorrhage into the sheath or the pressure
of a fragment of bone.
_Complete Subcutaneous Rupture._--When the rupture is complete, all the
coats of the vessel are torn and the blood escapes into the surrounding
bleeding may not take place until the period of reaction. Rupture of the
popliteal artery in association with fracture of the femur, or of the
axillary or brachial artery with fracture of the humerus or dislocation
Like incomplete rupture, this lesion is accompanied by loss of pulsation
painful swelling rapidly appears in the region of the injury, and, where
the cellular tissue is loose, may attain a considerable size. The
pressure of the effused blood occludes the veins and leads to congestion
and oedema of the limb beyond. The interference with the circulation, and
the damage to the tissues, may be so great that gangrene ensues.
must be placed in the most favourable condition for restoration of the
circulation. The skin is disinfected and the limb wrapped in cotton wool
venous return without at the same time interfering with the inflow of
blood. A careful watch must be kept on the state of nutrition of the
limb, lest gangrene occurs.
be complete in six or eight weeks. If the extravasation is great and the
clearing away the clots, to attempt to suture the rent in the artery,
or, if torn across, to join the ends after paring the bruised edges. If
this is impracticable, a ligature is applied above and below the
These descriptions apply to the larger arteries of the extremities. A
good illustration of subcutaneous rupture of the arteries of the head is
application of blunt violence to the skull; and of the arteries of the
trunk--caused by the tearing of the renal artery in rupture of the
The _treatment_ is that applicable to all wounds, with, in addition, the
ligation of the lacerated vessels.
#Punctured wounds# of blood vessels may result from stabs, or they may
be accidentally inflicted in the course of an operation.
The division of the coats of the vessel being incomplete, the natural
haemostasis that results from curling up of the intima and contraction of
widely damaged, the gradually increasing tension of the extravasated
blood retained within it may ultimately arrest the haemorrhage. A clot
then forms between the lips of the wound in the vessel wall and projects
surrounding tissues, and a traumatic aneurysm results. Secondary
haemorrhage may occur if the wound becomes infected.
the damaged vessel being ligated above and below the puncture. In some
cases it may be possible to suture the opening in the vessel wall. When
circumstances prevent these measures being taken, the bleeding may be
administration of drugs and in the use of exploring needles, are not
attended with any escape of blood, chiefly because of the elastic recoil
the point where the intima is punctured.
#Incised Wounds.#--We here refer only to such incised wounds as partly
divide the vessel wall.
Longitudinal wounds show little tendency to gape, and are therefore not
aneurysm.
When, however, the incision in the vessel wall is oblique or transverse,
the retraction of the muscular coat causes the opening to gape, with the
result that there is haemorrhage, which, even in comparatively small
arteries, may be so profuse as to prove dangerous. When the associated
wound in the soft parts is valvular the haemorrhage is arrested and an
aneurysm may develop.
the common carotid, the brachial, or the popliteal, has been partly
The sheath of the vessel or an adjacent fascia should be stitched
there is little risk of thrombosis or secondary haemorrhage; and even if
thrombosis should develop at the point of suture, the artery is
obstructed gradually, and the establishment of a collateral circulation
or when suture is impracticable, the artery should be tied above and
below the opening, and divided between the ligatures.
#Gunshot Wounds of Blood Vessels.#--In the majority of cases injuries of
the blood and the nature of the flow denote whether an artery or a vein
is implicated.
When an artery is wounded a firm _haematoma_ may form, with an expansile
circumscribed or becomes diffuse depends upon the density or laxity of
the tissues around it. In course of time a _traumatic arterial aneurysm_
may develop from such a haematoma.
_arterio-venous aneurysm_ (p. 310) may develop. This frequently takes
place without the formation of a haematoma as the arterial blood finds
its way into the vein and so does not escape into the tissues. Even if a
haematoma forms it seldom assumes a great size. In time a swelling is
level of the communication and accompanied by a continuous venous hum.
the vein by pressure, and the symptoms of arterial aneurysm replace
those of the arterio-venous form, the systolic bruit persisting, while
the venous hum disappears.
_Gangrene_ may ensue if the blood supply is seriously interfered with,
or the signs of _ischaemia_ may develop; the muscles lose their
elasticity, become hard and paralysed, and anaesthesia of the "glove" or
"stocking" type, with other alterations of sensation ensue. Apart from
may follow injury of a large vessel.
results are alike in both, such variations as occur being dependent
#Subcutaneous rupture# of veins occur most frequently in association
with fractures and in the reduction of dislocations. The veins most
commonly ruptured are the popliteal, the axillary, the femoral, and the
subclavian. On account of the smaller amount of elastic and muscular
walls are less than in an artery, and so bleeding may continue for a
outflow goes on more slowly, and the gradually increasing pressure
the same as when an artery is ruptured, excepting that of aneurysm, and
necessary to operate for the purpose of applying a ligature to the
#Wounds# of veins--punctured and incised--frequently occur in the course
of operations; for example, in the removal of tumours or diseased glands
from the neck, the axilla, or the groin. They are also met with as a
result of accidental stabs and of suicidal or homicidal injuries. The
haemorrhage from a large vein so damaged is usually profuse, but it is
When a vein is merely punctured, the bleeding may be arrested by
to suture the opening in the wall. This does not necessarily result in
peculiar to each are present in greater or less degree. In the limbs
followed by the development of arterio-venous aneurysm.
#Entrance of Air into Veins--Air Embolism.#--This serious, though
fortunately rare, accident is apt to occur in the course of operations
and fails to collapse on account of the rigidity of its walls, its
incorporation in a dense fascia, or from traction being made upon it. If
the wound in a vein is thus held open, the negative pressure during
inspiration sucks air into the right side of the heart. This is
heart may continue to beat forcibly, the peripheral pulse is weak, and
may even be imperceptible. On auscultating the heart, a churning sound
regain its power and recovery take place.
the root of the neck is called in this connection--care must be taken
not to cut or divide any vein before it has been secured by forceps, and
should be kept filled with normal salt solution. Immediately a cut is
recognised in a vein, a finger should be placed over the vessel on the
cardiac side of the wound, and kept there until the opening is secured.
injections of ether or strychnin and the application of mustard or hot
cloths over the chest. The head at the same time should be lowered to
prevent syncope. Attempts to withdraw the air by suction, and the
some, considered dangerous. In a desperate case massage of the heart
might be tried.
THE NATURAL ARREST OF HAEMORRHAGE AND THE REPAIR OF BLOOD
bleeding which follows immediately on the wounding of a blood vessel.
The natural process by which such haemorrhage is arrested varies with the
character of the wound in the vessel and may be modified by accidental
circumstances.
each segment retracts within its sheath in virtue of the recoil of the
elastic elements in its walls, the tunica intima curls up in the
interior of the vessel, and the tunica externa collapses over the cut
ends. The blood that escapes from the injured vessel fills the
outside, is known as the _external clot_, while the portion which
projects into the lumen of the vessel is known as the _internal clot_,
and it usually extends as far as the nearest collateral branch. These
processes constitute what is known as the _temporary arrest of
process; it becomes invaded by leucocytes and proliferating endothelial
converted into scar tissue.
ligature is usually sufficient to rupture the inner and middle coats,
which curl up within the lumen, the outer coat alone being held in the
permanently occludes the vessel as above described. The ligature and the
small portion of vessel beyond it are subsequently absorbed.
In course of time the collateral branches of the vessel above and below
free, so that even when large trunks have been divided the vascular
supply of the parts beyond may be completely restored. This is known as
the development of the _collateral circulation_.
_Imperfect Collateral Circulation._--While the development of the
collateral circulation after the ligation or obstruction from other
cause of a main arterial trunk may be sufficient to prevent gangrene of
the limb, it may be insufficient for its adequate nourishment; it may be
points; this is notably the case in the lower extremity after ligation
considerably, the occluding clot at the divided end of the vessel may be
washed away or the ligature displaced, permitting of fresh bleeding
taking place--_reactionary_ or _intermediary haemorrhage_ (p. 272).
occluding blood-clot or the young fibrous tissue may become
afresh--_secondary haemorrhage_ (p. 273).
(b) If an artery is only _partly cut across_, the divided fibres of
the tunica muscularis contract and those of the tunica externa retract,
does form, when the blood-pressure rises it is readily displaced,
leading to reactionary haemorrhage. Should the wound become infected,
secondary haemorrhage is specially liable to occur. A further risk
time lead to gradual stretching of the scar tissue which closes the gap
incision_ a blood-clot forms between the edges, becomes organised, and
is converted into cicatricial tissue which seals the aperture. Such
wounds may also be followed by reactionary or secondary haemorrhage, or
later by the formation of a traumatic aneurysm.
_Conditions which influence the Natural Arrest of Haemorrhage._--The
natural arrest of bleeding is favoured by tearing or crushing of the
the tendency of blood to coagulate when in contact with damaged tissue.
copious. The occurrence of syncope or of profound shock also helps to
stop bleeding by reducing the force of the heart's action.
On the other hand, there are conditions which retard the natural arrest.
When, for example, a vessel is only partly divided, the contraction and
retraction of the muscular coat, instead of diminishing the calibre of
be arrested. In certain situations, also, the arteries are so intimately
retract and contract--for example, in the scalp, in the penis, and in
bones--and copious bleeding may take place from comparatively small
vessels. This inability of the vessels to contract and retract is met
divided in the substance of a muscle also sometimes bleed unduly. Any
natural arrest. Lastly, in bleeders, there are conditions which
#Repair of a Vessel ligated in its Continuity.#--When a ligature is
applied to an artery it should be pulled sufficiently tight to occlude
the lumen without causing rupture of its coats. It often happens,
coats, so that only the outer coat remains in the grasp of the ligature.
tissue. Whether the inner and middle coats are ruptured or not, blood
coagulates both above and below the ligature, the proximal clot being
longer and broader than that on the distal side. In small arteries these
clots extend as far as the nearest collateral branch, but in the larger
granulation tissue, and its replacement by cicatricial tissue, so that
this process the coagulum only plays a passive role by forming a
surrounding the vessel, and the elements of the clot, are ultimately
#Repair of Veins.#--The process of repair in veins is the same as that
circulation through the vessel be re-established.
controlled by _digital compression_ of the main artery supplying the
limb rather than by a tourniquet. If efficiently applied compression
factor in producing shock.
essential that the vessel should be lying over a bone which will furnish
the necessary resistance. The common carotid, for example, is pressed
backward and medially against the transverse process (carotid tubercle)
of the sixth cervical vertebra; the temporal against the temporal
process (zygoma) in front of the ear; and the facial against the
In the upper extremity, the subclavian is pressed against the first rib
by making pressure downwards and backwards in the hollow above the
humerus.
direction backward and slightly upward against the brim of the pelvis,
midway between the symphysis pubis and the anterior superior iliac
vertebrae opposite the umbilicus, if the spine is arched well forwards
extremities and pelvis to hang over the end of the table, while the
abdominal aorta and compresses it against the vertebral column.
Momburg recommends an elastic cord wound round the body between the
iliac crest and the lower border of the ribs, but this procedure has
certain means of preventing haemorrhage--say in an amputation--is by the
use of some form of _tourniquet_, such as the elastic tube of Esmarch or
of Foulis, or an elastic bandage, or the screw tourniquet of Petit.
Before applying any of these it is advisable to empty the limb of blood.
This is best done after the manner suggested by Lister: the limb is held
the arteries reflexly contract, so that the quantity of blood entering
the limb is reduced to a minimum. With the limb still elevated the
tourniquet is firmly applied, a part being selected where the vessel can
be pressed directly against a bone, and where there is no risk of
exerting injurious pressure on the nerve-trunks. The tourniquet should
be applied over several layers of gauze or lint to protect the skin, and
the upper extremity, in the middle of the arm. A tourniquet should never
be applied tighter or left on longer than is absolutely necessary.
The screw tourniquet of Petit is to be preferred when it is desired to
intermit the flow through the main artery as in operations for aneurysm.
amputations at the hip or shoulder--the haemorrhage may be controlled by
instance, the external iliac or the subclavian. For such contingencies
also the steel skewers used by Spence and Wyeth, or a special clamp or
forceps, such as that suggested by Lynn Thomas, may be employed. In the
case of vessels which it is undesirable to occlude permanently, such as
the common carotid, the temporary application of a ligature or clamp is
useful.
#Arrest of Haemorrhage.#--_Ligature._--This is the best means of securing
the larger vessels. The divided vessel having been caught with forceps
example in a dense tissue like the scalp or periosteum, or in a friable
passed so as to surround the bleeding vessel a short distance from its
end, in this way ensuring a better hold and preventing the ligature from
completely cut across to enable its walls to contract and retract, and
to facilitate the application of forceps and ligatures.
_Torsion._--This method is seldom employed except for comparatively
inner and middle coats so that they curl up inside the lumen, while the
outer fibrous coat is twisted into a cord which occludes the end of the
_Forci-pressure._--Bleeding from the smallest arteries and from
minutes with artery forceps. It is usually found that on the removal of
the forceps at the end of an operation no further haemorrhage takes
employed to arrest haemorrhage, but is frequently useful in preventing
it, as, for example, in the removal of piles, or in opening the bowel in
colostomy. It is used at a dull-red heat, which sears the divided ends
slough produced by the charring of the tissues is sometimes attended
_Haemostatics_ or _Styptics_.--The local application of haemostatics is
seldom to be recommended. In the treatment of epistaxis or bleeding from
the nose, of haemorrhage from the socket of a tooth, and sometimes from
surface. Adrenalin and turpentine are the most useful drugs for this
purpose.
Haemorrhage from bone, for example the skull, may be arrested by means of
Horsley's aseptic plastic wax. To stop persistent oozing from soft
muscle has been found to be closely adherent and undergoing
organisation.
#Arrest of Accidental Haemorrhage.#--The most efficient means of
temporarily controlling haemorrhage is by pressure applied with the
finger, or with a pad of gauze, directly over the bleeding point. While
tourniquet, over the main vessel of the limb on the proximal side of the
bleeding point. A useful _emergency tourniquet_ may be improvised by
folding a large handkerchief _en cravatte_, with a cork or piece of wood
in the fold to act as a pad. The handkerchief is applied round the
limb, with the pad over the main artery, and the ends knotted on the
lateral aspect of the limb. With a strong piece of wood the handkerchief
is wound up like a Spanish windlass, until sufficient pressure is
When haemorrhage is taking place from a number of small vessels, its
of the hand or forearm, or of the foot or leg, bleeding may be arrested
by placing a pad in the flexure and acutely flexing the limb at the
#Reactionary Haemorrhage.#--Reactionary or intermediary haemorrhage
hours after an operation or injury. It may be due to the increase in the
blood-pressure that accompanies reaction displacing clots which have
formed in the vessels, or causing vessels to bleed which did not bleed
during the operation; to the slipping of a ligature; or to the giving
relaxation of the dartos during the first few hours after operation
As a rule, reactionary haemorrhage takes place from small vessels as a
not, it is usually sufficient to remove the clots and apply firm
vessels. Douching the wound with hot sterilised water (about 110 o F.),
capillary oozing. When the bleeding is more copious, it is usually due
to a ligature having slipped from a large vessel such as the external
of the tissues around an artery. The septic process causes softening and
erosion of the wall of the artery so that it gives way under the
pressure of the contained blood. The leakage may occur in drops, or as a
rush of blood, according to the extent of the erosion, the size of the
artery concerned, and the relations of the erosion to the surrounding
tissues. When met with as a complication of a wound there is an
and the first haemorrhage, this time being required for the extension of
of its coats. When secondary haemorrhage occurs apart from a wound, there
and it may be fatal haemorrhage. The mechanical pressure of a fragment of
process in causing erosion of the artery. In pre-Listerian days, the
that when the collateral circulation was well established, the leakage
on a large scale, which is rapidly fatal.
The _appearances of the wound_ in cases complicated by secondary
haemorrhage are only characteristic in so far that while obviously
infected, there is an absence of all reaction; instead of frankly
suppurating, there is little or no discharge and the surrounding
cellular tissue and the limb beyond are oedematous and pit on pressure.
The _general symptoms_ of septic poisoning in cases of secondary
operation, for example, may be apparently normal except that the wound
does not heal satisfactorily. For example, a patient may be recovering
pharynx or larynx and the associated lymph glands in the neck, and be
able to be up and going about his room, when, suddenly, without warning
and without obvious cause, a rush of blood occurs from the mouth or the
incompletely healed wound in the neck, causing death within a few
minutes.
marked pallor and progressive failure of strength, which, of itself,
_Treatment._--The treatment of secondary haemorrhage includes the use of
local measures to arrest the bleeding, the employment of general
measures to counteract the accompanying toxaemia, and when the loss of
blood has been considerable, the treatment of the bloodless state.
_Local Measures to arrest the Haemorrhage._--The occurrence of even
wound_, clear out the clots and infected tissues with a sharp spoon,
disinfect the walls of the cavity with eusol or hydrogen peroxide, and
antiseptic, such as "bipp," so that, if the bleeding does not recur, it
may be left undisturbed for several days. The packing should if possible
so arranged as to make pressure on the artery above the erosion. The
dressings and bandage are then applied, with the limb in the attitude
that will diminish the force of the stream through the main artery, for
example, flexion at the elbow in haemorrhage from the deep palmar arch.
If the wound involves one of the extremities, it may be useful; and it
imparts confidence to the nurse, and, it may be, to the patient, if a
Petit's tourniquet is loosely applied above the wound, which the nurse
is instructed to tighten up in the event of bleeding taking place.
if repeated, ligation of the artery itself or of the trunk from which it
springs, at a selected spot higher up, should be considered. This is
most often indicated in wounds of the extremities.
arm for haemorrhage from the deep palmar arch, and of the posterior
tibial behind the medial malleolus for haemorrhage from the sole of the
foot.
haemorrhage recurs after proximal ligation, or if this has been followed
the wound and the virulence of the sepsis would of themselves justify
removal of the limb. Every surgeon can recall cases in which a timely
amputation has been the means of saving life.
state_, are carried out on the usual lines.
which depend upon infective or toxic conditions and in which no gross
lesion of the vessels can be discovered. The bleeding occurs as an
oozing, which may be comparatively slight and unimportant, or by its
persistence may become serious. It takes place into the superficial
layers of the skin, from mucous membranes, and into the substance of
such organs as the pancreas. Haemorrhage from the stomach and intestine,
attended with a brown or black discoloration of the vomit and of the
gall-bladder, and other abdominal organs. Haemorrhage from the mucous
_post-operative haematemesis_.
bleeding takes place as on the amount of blood lost. The sudden loss of
cavity--for example, after rupture of the liver or spleen--is attended
with marked pallor of the surface of the body and coldness of the skin,
pulse becomes feeble, soft, and rapid, and the patient is dull and
listless, and complains of extreme thirst. The temperature is usually
sub-normal; and the respiration rapid, shallow, and sighing in
character. Abnormal visual sensations, in the form of flashes of light
"air-hunger" ensue. On account of the small quantity of blood
becomes extremely restless, gasping for breath, constantly throwing
about his arms and baring his chest in the vain attempt to breath more
freely. Faintness and giddiness are marked features. The diminished
twitchings, and sometimes convulsions. Finally the pupils dilate, the
Young children stand the loss of blood badly, but they quickly recover,
and especially when they are fat, the loss of blood is badly borne, and
the ill effects last longer. Women, on the whole, stand loss of blood
better than men, and in them the blood is more rapidly re-formed. A few
15,000 to 30,000.
#Treatment of the Bloodless State.#--The patient should be placed in a
stimulants, such as strychnin or alcohol, must be judiciously
has been found useful in relieving the urgent symptoms of dyspnoea.
where it is more needed, by holding them vertically in the air for a few
wool, from the periphery towards the trunk.
_Introduction of Fluids into the Circulation._--The most valuable
measure for maintaining the circulation, however, is by transfusion of
blood (_Op. Surg._, p. 37). If this is not immediately available the
introduction of from one to three pints of physiological salt
solution (a teaspoonful of common salt to a pint of water) into a vein,
solution is sterilised by boiling, and cooled to a temperature of about
105 o F. The addition of 5 to 10 minims of adrenalin solution (1 in 1000)
is advantageous in raising the blood-pressure (_Op. Surg._, p. 565).
When the intra-venous method is not available, one or two pints of
rectum, by means of a long rubber tube and a filler. Satisfactory,
the axilla, or under the skin of the back.
If the patient can retain fluids taken by the mouth--such as hot coffee,
barley water, or soda water--these should be freely given, unless the
patients who are bloodless as a result of haemorrhage from gastric and
duodenal ulcers, and in bleeders.
HAEMOPHILIA
The term haemophilia is applied to an inherited disease which renders the
patient liable to serious haemorrhage from even the most trivial
The cause of the disease and its true nature are as yet unknown. There
is no proof of any structural defect in the blood vessels, and beyond
the fact that there is a diminution in the number of blood-plates, it
composition of the blood.
affected family being liable to suffer. Its mode of transmission to
is transmitted through the female line. Thus the daughters of a father
transmit the tendency to their male offspring. The sons, on the other
hand, neither suffer themselves nor transmit the disease to their
children (Fig. 64). The female members of a haemophilic stock are often
very prolific, and there is usually a predominance of daughters in their
families.
Mrs D. (Lancashire) F                  M (History not known
                   ............|
                              .|
                           ....|
                           .+---------+--------+
         Great-Grandmother .|         |        |
           (Married three  .F        MB       MB
              ..............|                  Husband             Husband
   +-----------+------------+----------+-------+-------+-----------+------+
   |          .|            |          |       +-------+-----------+------+
   |          .|            |          |       MB      F Died in      No
Died       Grandmother      |          |               | Childbed    Family
 aet.          .|            |     +-----------+   +----+---
 70           .|        +------+  |had family |   |
              .|        |      |  |but history|   |
              .|        MB    MB  |not known  |   MB
              .|
+-----+----------+------------+------------+------------+-------------+
|     |          |            |            |.           |             |
M     M          M            MB           F.           F             F
    +----+                                 |.     |  |  |   |  |  |   |
    |    |                                 |.     M  M  MB  F  F  F   |
     Not Married                           |.             +---+---+---+---+
                         |    .|*   .|*    |     |     |
                         M    MB    MB     F     F     F
 ** the patients observed by the authors. The dotted line shows the
manifests itself during the first few years of life. In rare instances
profuse haemorrhage takes place when the umbilical cord separates. As a
rule the first evidence is the occurrence of long-continued and
uncontrollable bleeding from a comparatively slight injury, such as the
scratch of a pin, the extraction of a tooth, or after the operation of
circumcision. The blood oozes slowly from the capillaries; at first it
appears normal, but after flowing for some days, or it may be weeks, it
becomes pale, thin, and watery, and shows less and less tendency to
Female members of haemophilia families sometimes show a tendency to
excessive haemorrhage, but they seldom manifest the characteristic
features met with in the male members.
Sometimes the haemorrhage takes place apparently spontaneously from the
gums, the nasal or the intestinal mucous membrane. In other cases the
bleeding occurs into the cellular tissue under the skin or mucous
elbow, or hip. The patient suffers repeatedly from such haemorrhages, the
determining injury being often so slight as to have passed unobserved.
There is evidence that the tendency to bleed is greater at certain times
character--although nothing is known as to the cause of the variation.
After a severe haemorrhage into the cellular tissue or into a joint, the
103 o F., the pulse become small and rapid, and haemic murmurs are
sometimes developed over the heart and large arteries. The swelling is
tense, fluctuating, and hot, and there is considerable pain and
tenderness.
like that seen in scurvy, and there is a remarkable absence of any
The acute symptoms gradually subside, and the blood is slowly absorbed,
the discoloration of the skin passing through the same series of changes
often sensitive and reticent regarding the fact, and it may only be
to exclude scurvy and purpura. Repeated haemorrhages into a joint may
result in appearances which closely simulate those of tuberculous
clinical features closely resembling those of acute cellulitis or
osteomyelitis. A careful examination, however, may reveal ecchymoses on
condition, and may prevent the disastrous consequences that may follow
incision.
they often survive several severe attacks. After middle life the
tendency to bleed appears to diminish.
of little avail. From among the numerous means suggested, the following
may be mentioned: The application to the bleeding point of gauze soaked
in a 1 in 1000 solution of adrenalin; prolonged inhalation of oxygen;
subcutaneous injections of gelatin--5 ounces of a 2 1/2 per cent.
temperature of about 100 o F.; the injection of pituitary extract. The
sometimes arrests the bleeding.
To prevent bleeding in haemophilics, intra-venous or subcutaneous
sheep, the dog, or the horse, have proved useful. If fresh serum is not
available, anti-diphtheritic or anti-tetanic serum or trade
The chloride and lactate of calcium, and extract of thymus gland have
been employed to increase the coagulability of the blood. The patient
should drink large quantities of milk, which also increases the
coagulability of the blood. Monro has observed remarkable results from
the hypodermic injection of emetin hydrochloride in  1/2-grain doses.
THROMBOSIS AND EMBOLISM
The processes known as thrombosis and embolism are so intimately
associated with the diseases of blood vessels that it is convenient to
define these terms in the first instance.
#Thrombosis.#--The term _thrombus_ is applied to a clot of blood formed
in the interior of the heart or of a blood vessel, and the process by
which such a clot forms is known as _thrombosis_. It would appear that
slowing or stagnation of the blood-stream, and interference with the
integrity of the lining membrane of the vessel wall, are the most
favour coagulation. When the thrombus is formed slowly, it consists of
white blood cells with a small proportion of fibrin, and, being
often met with in the sac of an aneurysm (Fig. 72). When rapidly formed
in a vessel in which the blood is almost stagnant--as, for example, in a
(Fig. 66). Sometimes the thrombus is _mixed_--a red thrombus being
When aseptic, a thrombus may become detached and be carried off in the
degenerate and undergo calcification. Occasionally a small thrombus
situated behind a valve in a varicose vein or in the terminal end of a
then spoken of as a _phlebolith_; it gives a shadow with the X-rays.
When infected with pyogenic bacteria, the thrombus becomes converted
into pus and a localised abscess forms; or portions of the thrombus may
give rise to secondary foci of suppuration--pyaemic abscesses.
portions of thrombi or of fibrinous formations on the valves of the
heart, the latter being usually infected with micro-organisms.
has already been described. Infective emboli are the direct cause of the
secondary abscesses that occur in pyaemia; and they are sometimes
responsible for the formation of aneurysm.
ARTERITIS
_Pyogenic._--Non-suppurative inflammation of the coats of an artery may
is not uncommon in children, and explains the occurrence of aneurysm in
When suppuration occurs, the vessel wall becomes disintegrated and gives
is opened.
_Syphilitic._--The inflammation associated with syphilis results in
narrowed, or even obliterated--_endarteritis obliterans_. The middle
These changes cause serious interference with the nutrition of the parts
supplied by the affected arteries. In large trunks, by diminishing the
of aneurysm.
arteritis are sometimes met with in _tuberculous_ lesions.
#Arterio-sclerosis# or #Chronic Arteritis#.--These terms are applied to
certain changes which result in narrowing of the lumen and loss of
elasticity in the arteries. The condition may affect the whole vascular
there is more or less uniform thickening of the tunica intima from
proliferation of the endothelium and increase in the connective tissue
in the elastic lamina--a form of obliterative endarteritis. The
narrowing of the vessels may be sufficient to determine gangrene in the
the deposit of lime salts in the young connective tissue and the
formation of calcareous plates or rings over a considerable area of the
Changes of a similar kind sometimes occur in the middle coat, the lime
salts being deposited among the muscle fibres in concentric rings.
The primary cause of arterio-sclerosis is not definitely known, but its
almost constant occurrence, to a greater or less degree, in the aged
suggests that it is of the nature of a senile degeneration. It is
favoured by anything which throws excessive strain on the vessel walls,
such as heavy muscular work; by chronic alcoholism and syphilis; or by
chronic Bright's disease or gout. It occurs with greater frequency and
with greater severity in men than in women.
Atheromatous degeneration is most common in the large arterial trunks,
the vessel lies in contact with bone. The presence of diseased patches
external violence and so give rise to traumatic aneurysm. Thrombosis is
liable to occur when calcareous plates are exposed in the lumen of the
embolism. Arterio-sclerosis also interferes with the natural arrest of
tortuous cords, which are sometimes so hard that they have been aptly
borne in mind, however, that the condition of the radial artery may fail
to afford a clue to that of the larger arteries. Calcified arteries are
readily identified in skiagrams (Fig. 65).
We have met with a chronic form of arterial degeneration in elderly
in which the artery is remarkably attenuated and dilated, and so friable
that the wall readily tears when seized with an artery-forceps,
rendering ligation of the vessel in the ordinary way well-nigh
round with a strip of peritoneum or omentum.
The most serious form of arterial _thrombosis_ is that met with _in the
abdominal aorta_, which is attended with violent pains in the lower
#Thrombosis# is more common in veins than in arteries, because slowing
induced in veins.
example, when the wall of a vein is incised, or the vessel included in a
bone or by a bandage too tightly applied. Under these conditions
considered in relation to the repair of blood vessels.
diseases--gout, for example; the endothelium of the veins undergoing
the blood--which favour the formation of thrombi.
Under these various conditions the formation of a thrombus is not
of them this additional factor may be present.
#Phlebitis.#--Various forms of phlebitis are met with, but for practical
tendency to the formation of a thrombus; the other in which the
infective element predominates.
debilitated and anaemic, and who are confined to bed for prolonged
periods--for example, during the treatment of fractures of the leg or
pelvis, or after such operations as herniotomy, prostatectomy, or
_Clinical Features._--The most typical example of this form of phlebitis
pain in the lower limb--sometimes below, sometimes above the knee. This
tenderness along the line of the affected vein, and the skin over it is
patient experiences a feeling of stiffness and tightness throughout the
limb. There is often oedema of the leg and foot, especially when the limb
but the swelling and tenderness of the vein and the oedema of the limb
may last for many weeks.
When the deep veins--iliac, femoral, popliteal--are involved, there is
great swelling of the whole limb, which is of a firm almost "wooden"
consistence, and of a pale-white colour; the oedema may be so great that
it is impossible to feel the affected vein until the swelling has
subsided. This is most often seen in puerperal women, and is known as
_phlegmasia alba dolens_.
_Treatment._--The patient must be placed at absolute rest, with the foot
the parts, lest the clot be displaced and embolism occur. To avoid
be applied. Later, ichthyol-glycerin, or glycerin and belladonna, may be
douching and gentle massage may be employed to disperse the oedema; and
when the patient gets up he should wear a supporting elastic bandage.
The _infective_ form usually begins as a peri-phlebitis arising in
connection with some focus of infection in the adjacent tissues. The
elements of the vessel wall are destroyed by suppuration, and the
thrombus in its lumen becomes infected with pyogenic bacteria and
undergoes softening.
_Occlusion of the inferior vena cava_ as a result of infective
thrombosis is a well-known condition, the thrombosis extending into the
main trunk from some of its tributaries, either from the femoral or
iliac veins below or from the hepatic veins above.
suppuration--pyaemic abscesses.
the transverse sinus as a sequel to chronic suppuration in the mastoid
antrum and middle ear. It also occurs in relation to the peripheral
veins, but in these it can seldom be recognised as a separate entity,
being merged in the general infective process from which it takes
suppurative lesion there is a sudden rise of temperature, with pain,
rare cases a localised abscess forms in the vein and points towards the
_Treatment._--Attention must be directed towards the condition with
which the phlebitis is associated. Ligation of the vein on the cardiac
side of the thrombus with a view to preventing embolism is seldom
later, the jugular vein is ligated with this object in cases of
phlebitis of the transverse sinus.
The term varix is applied to a condition in which veins are so altered
in structure that they remain permanently dilated, and are at the same
time lengthened and tortuous. Two types are met with: one in which
dilatation of a large superficial vein and its tributaries is the most
obvious feature; the other, in which bunches of distended and tortuous
vessels develop at one or more points in the course of a vein, a
condition to which Virchow applied the term _angioma racemosum venosum_.
Any vein in the body may become varicose, but the condition is rare
spermatic cord (varicocele), and in the veins of the anal canal
(haemorrhoids).
We are here concerned with varix as it occurs in the veins of the lower
extremity.
_Etiology._--Considerable difference of opinion exists as to the
congenital deficiency in the number, size, and strength of the valves of
the affected veins, and in an inherent weakness in the vessel walls.
The _angioma racemosum venosum_ is probably also due to a congenital
alteration in the structure of the vessels, and is allied to tumours of
suggested by Virchow, is supported by the fact that in a large
proportion of cases the condition is hereditary; not only may several
also an indication of its congenital origin.
In the majority of cases it is only when some exciting factor comes into
most common exciting cause is increased pressure within the veins, and
congenitally weak. The direct pressure of a tumour, or of the gravid
uterus on the large venous trunks in the pelvis, may so obstruct the
the production of varicose veins has been exaggerated, although it must
be admitted that this practice is calculated to aggravate the condition
when it is once established. It has been proved experimentally that the
fact which helps to explain the frequency with which varicosity occurs
repeated and violent muscular efforts. There is reason to believe,
moreover, that a sudden strain may, by rupturing the valves and so
congenital defect. Prolonged standing or walking, by allowing gravity to
act on the column of blood in the veins of the lower limbs, is also an
important determining factor in the production of varix.
dilatation of the superficial veins, by throwing an increased amount of
work upon them. This is to be looked upon rather as a compensatory
hypertrophy of the superficial vessels than as a true varix.
_Morbid Anatomy._--In the lower extremity the varicosity most commonly
The essential lesion is the absence or deficiency of valves, so that
back upon them. Normally the valves in the femoral and iliac veins and
in the inferior vena cava are imperfectly developed, so that in the
pressure of the column of venous blood.
The whole length of the vein may be affected, but as a rule the disease
loops of the convoluted vein are often bound together by fibrous tissue.
All the coats are thickened, chiefly by an increased development of
arterio-sclerosis occur. The walls of varicose veins are often
exceedingly brittle. In some cases the thickening is uniform, and in
cysts_, and being most commonly met with in the region of the saphenous
Saphena Vein, in longitudinal section.]
_Clinical Features._--Varix is most frequently met with between puberty
The amount of discomfort bears no direct proportion to the extent of
the varicosity. It depends rather upon the degree of pressure in the
implicated, the pressure in the vein is high and the patient suffers a
of the saphena and its valves are intact, and only the more distal veins
are involved, the pressure is not so high and there is comparatively
Cramp-like pains in the muscles are often associated with varix of the
deep veins.
patient is examined in the upright posture. In advanced cases, bead-like
ridge, due to periphlebitis, may be detected on each side of the vein.
they can be identified on palpation as gutter-like tracks. When large
If the patient is placed on a couch and the limb elevated, the veins are
emptied, and if pressure is then made over the region of the saphenous
saphena system alone is involved, the veins fill again very slowly from
below. If the small saphena system also is involved, and if
rapidly. When the pressure over the saphenous opening is removed, the
blood rapidly rushes into the varicose vessels from above; this is known
The most marked dilatation usually occurs on the medial side of the
the region of the knee. Frequently a large branch establishes a
in the region of the popliteal space, or across the front of the upper
part of the tibia. The superficial position of this last branch and its
proximity to the bone render it liable to injury.
[Illustration: FIG. 67.--Extensive Varix of Internal Saphena System on
blue streaks arranged in a stellate or arborescent manner, especially in
women who have borne children.
_Complications._--When the varix is of long standing, the skin in the
lower part of the leg sometimes assumes a mahogany-brown or bluish hue,
skin. The incompetence of the valves allows the pressure in the varicose
is impeded. From the same cause the blood in the deep veins is enabled
to enter the superficial veins, where the backward pressure is so great
The blood therefore loses more and more of its oxygen, and so fails to
nourish the tissues.
The _ulcer_ of the leg associated with varicose veins has already been
described.
_Haemorrhage_ may take place from a varicose vein as a result of a wound
by severe muscular strain may determine rupture of a vein exposed in the
floor of an ulcer. If the limb is dependent, the incompetency of the
particularly if the patient is intoxicated when the rupture takes place
_Phlebitis and thrombosis_ are common sequelae of varix, and may prove
rise to emboli. The larger the varix the greater is the tendency for a
usually originate in venous cysts or pouches, and at acute bends on the
vessel, especially when these are situated in the vicinity of the knee,
and are subjected to repeated injuries--for example in riding.
people, the occurrence of thrombosis leads to cure of the condition by
the thrombus becoming organised and obliterating the vein.
palliative, as it is obviously impossible to restore to the vessels
a garter, which constricts the limb, and any obvious cause of direct
pressure on the pelvic veins, such as a tumour, persistent
constipation, or an ill-fitting truss, should be removed. Cardiac,
renal, or pulmonary causes of venous congestion must also be treated,
exertion and prolonged standing or walking are to be avoided, and the
hours each day. To support the distended vessels, a closely woven silk
or worsted stocking, or a light and porous form of elastic bandage,
applied as a puttee, should be worn. These appliances should be put on
before the patient leaves his bed in the morning, and should only be
allowed to become dilated. Elastic stockings, and bandages made entirely
_Operative Treatment._--In aggravated cases, when the patient is
suffering pain, when his occupation is interfered with by repeated
attacks of phlebitis, or when there are large pouches on the veins,
operative treatment is called for. The younger the patient the clearer
is the indication to operate. It may be necessary to operate to enable a
patient to enter one of the public services, even although no symptoms
are present. The presence of an ulcer does not contra-indicate
which the trunk of the great saphena vein in the thigh is alone
involved. It consists in exposing three or four inches of the vein in
portion of the vein.
to remove longer segments of the veins. It consists in the employment of
special instruments known as "ring-enucleators" or "vein-strippers," by
comparatively small incisions.
An alternative procedure consists in avulsing segments of the vein by
means of Babcock's stylet, which consists of a flexible steel rod, 30
inches in length, with acorn-shaped terminals. The instrument is passed
along the lumen of the segment to be dealt with, and a ligature applied
are pouches or calcareous deposits in their walls, or where there has
position. We have employed this method with satisfactory results.
The treatment of the complications of varix has already been considered.
ANGIOMA[4]
[4] In the description of angiomas we have followed the teaching of the
late John Duncan.
vessels of which they are composed, into the capillary, the venous, and
CAPILLARY ANGIOMA
telangiectasis.
#Naevus.#--A naevus is a collection of dilated capillaries, the afferent
arterioles and the efferent venules of which often share in the
the child is some days old, but attention is usually drawn to them
within a fortnight of birth. For practical purposes the most useful
classification of naevi is into the cutaneous, the subcutaneous, and the
mixed forms.
vein winding about among the capillaries may sometimes be detected.
These naevi occur on any part of the body, but they are most frequently
some being no bigger than a pin-head, while others cover large areas of
the body. In colour they present every tint from purple to brilliant
red; in the majority there is a considerable dash of blue, especially in
cold weather.
tendency to disappear, and it is especially persistent when associated
The _treatment_ of the cutaneous naevus is unsatisfactory, owing to the
difficulty of removing the naevus without leaving a scar which is even
Paquelin thermo-cautery, or by escharotics, such as nitric acid. For
best left alone.
well-defined, localised tumour, which may possess a distinct capsule,
it presents the appearance of a finely reticulated sponge.
and yielding a sensation like that of a sponge; the skin over it is
the child struggles or cries. From a cold abscess it is diagnosed by the
When situated over one of the hernial openings, it closely simulates a
hernia; and when it occurs in the middle line of the face, head, or
back, it may be mistaken for such other congenital conditions as
meningocele or spina bifida. When other means fail, the use of an
exploring needle clears up the diagnosis.
_Mixed Naevus._--As its name indicates, the mixed naevus partakes of the
characters of the other two varieties; that is, it is a subcutaneous
It is frequently met with on the face and head, but may occur on any
as the cheek, tongue, and soft palate. The swelling is rounded or
tumour, sometimes only over a limited area. Frequently the margin only
is of a bright-red colour, while the skin in the centre resembles a
[Illustration: FIG. 68.--Mixed Naevus of Nose which was subsequently
the first few months of life; after this they usually grow at the same
cure by a process of obliteration, similar to the obliteration of
vessels in cicatricial tissue. This usually begins about the period of
the first dentition, sometimes at the second dentition, and sometimes at
at these periods. The onset of natural cure is recognised by the tumour
becoming firmer and less compressible, and, in the mixed variety, by the
overlying skin may initiate the curative process.
Towards adult life the spaces in a subcutaneous naevus may become greatly
_Treatment._--In view of the frequency with which subcutaneous and mixed
naevi disappear spontaneously, interference is only called for when the
growth of the tumour is out of proportion to that of the child, or when,
from its situation--for example in the vicinity of the eye--any marked
increase in its size would render it less amenable to treatment.
The methods of treatment most generally applicable are the use of radium
and carbon dioxide snow, igni-puncture, electrolysis, and excision.
For naevi situated on exposed parts, where it is desirable to avoid a
scar, the use of _radium_ is to be preferred. The tube of radium is
applied at intervals to different parts of the naevus, the duration and
obliteration of the naevoid tissue by cicatricial contraction without
destroying the overlying skin. _Carbon-dioxide snow_ may be employed in
of starting at each point a process of cicatrisation which extends
throughout the naevoid tissue and so obliterates the vessels.
_Electrolysis_ acts by decomposing the blood and tissues into their
being given off in a nascent condition, at once enter into new
potash, both in a state of minute subdivision, make their appearance.
current used should be from 20 to 80 milliamperes, gradually increasing
from zero, without shock; three to six large Bunsen cells give a
are the best. Both poles are introduced into the naevus, the positive
being kept fixed at one spot, while the negative is moved about so as to
produce a number of different tracks of cauterisation. On no account
must either pole be allowed to come in contact with the skin, lest a
slough be formed. The duration of the sitting is determined by the
indication to stop. To cauterise the track and so prevent bleeding, the
needles should be slowly withdrawn while the current is flowing. When
the skin is reached the current is turned off. The punctures are covered
with collodion. Six or eight weeks should be allowed to elapse before
covered parts of the body, where a scar is of no importance. Its chief
and that the cure is speedy and certain. The operation is attended with
much less haemorrhage than might be expected.
cavernous angioma is sometimes met with in internal organs. It may
and may become stationary. The swelling is rounded or oval, there is no
pulsation or bruit, and the tumour is but slightly compressible. The
#Aneurysm by Anastomosis# is the name applied to a vascular tumour in
which the arteries, veins, and capillaries are all involved. It is met
It is pulsatile, and a systolic bruit or a "thrilling" murmur may be
heard over it. The chief risk is haemorrhage from injury or ulceration.
to persist with it. In some cases ligation of the afferent vessels has
#Arterial Angioma# or #Cirsoid Aneurysm#.--This is composed of the
enlarged branches of an arterial trunk. It originates in the smaller
trunk, and may even involve branches of other trunks with which the
affected artery anastomoses.
The condition is probably congenital in origin, though its appearance is
frequently preceded by an injury. It almost invariably occurs in the
scalp, and is usually met with in adolescent young adults.
narrowings and dilatations here and there. Grooves and gutters are
There is a constant loud bruit in the tumour, which greatly troubles the
patient and may interfere with sleep. There is no tendency either to
natural cure or to rupture, but severe and even fatal haemorrhage may
follow a wound of the dilated vessels.
[Illustration: FIG. 70.--Cirsoid Aneurysm of Orbit and Face, which
large tumours the bleeding is formidable. In many cases electrolysis is
positive pole is placed in the centre of the tumour, while the negative
An aneurysm is a sac communicating with an artery, and containing fluid
or coagulated blood.
Two types are met with--the pathological and the traumatic. It is
convenient to describe in this section also certain conditions in which
vein--arterio-venous aneurysm.
PATHOLOGICAL ANEURYSM
In this class are included such dilatations as result from weakening of
the arterial coats, combined, in most cases, with a loss of elasticity
arterio-sclerosis. In some cases the vessel wall is softened by
arteritis--especially the embolic form--so that it yields before the
example, of violent muscular efforts or of excessive indulgence in
alcohol, plays an important part in the causation of aneurysm. These
factors probably explain the comparative frequency of aneurysm in those
who follow such arduous occupations as soldiers, sailors,
vessels are beginning to degenerate, although the heart is still
vigorous and the men are hard at work. The comparative immunity of women
may also be explained by the less severe muscular strain involved by
Syphilis plays an important part in the production of aneurysm, probably
inducing an increase in the vascular tension in the peripheral vessels,
from loss of elasticity of the vessel wall and narrowing of the lumen as
a result of syphilitic arteritis. It is a striking fact that aneurysm is
seldom met with in women who have not suffered from syphilis.
#Varieties--Fusiform Aneurysm.#--When the _whole circumference_ of an
artery has been weakened, the tension of the blood causes the walls to
dilate uniformly, so that a fusiform or tubular aneurysm results. All
thickened by the deposit in them of connective tissue, this variety
increases in size slowly and seldom gives rise to urgent symptoms.
As a rule a fusiform aneurysm contains fluid blood, but when the intima
effected by the emerging artery becoming occluded by a clot; it has also
little tendency to rupture.
weakened--for example by atheroma or by other form of arteritis--this
portion yields before the pressure of the blood, and a sacculated
aneurysm results. The internal and middle coats being already damaged,
To withstand the pressure the external coat becomes thickened, and as
found matted together in its wall. The wall is further strengthened by
become organised.
sac, where it forms a pale, striated, firm mass, which constitutes a
friable (Fig. 72). The laminated clot not only strengthens the sac,
enabling it to resist the blood-pressure and so prevent rupture, but, if
it increases sufficiently to fill the cavity, may bring about cure. The
nature in producing such a clot.
Sacculated aneurysm, as compared with the fusiform variety, tends to
rupture and also to cure by the formation of laminated clot; natural
cure is sometimes all but complete when extension and rupture occur and
cause death.
escapes into the cellular tissue.
the line of an artery of a globular swelling, which pulsates. The
that when both hands are placed over the swelling they are separated
with each beat of the heart. If the main artery be compressed on the
cardiac side of the swelling, the pulsation is arrested and the tumour
becomes smaller and less tense, and it may be still further reduced in
size by gentle pressure being made over it so as to empty it of fluid
be heard with the stethoscope. It is to be borne in mind that
occasionally, when the interchange of blood between an aneurysm and the
clot--_consolidated aneurysm_--these signs disappear, and the clinical
the affected side the wave is smaller in volume, and delayed in time. A
and that the force and rapidity of the tidal wave are diminished.
laminated clot and erosion of bodies of vertebrae. The intervertebral
discs are intact.]
usually thickened and adherent to it and to one another. Adjacent veins
may be so compressed that congestion and oedema of the parts beyond are
produced. Pain, disturbances of sensation, and muscular paralyses may
result from pressure on nerves. Such bones as the sternum and vertebrae
undergo erosion and are absorbed by the gradually increasing pressure of
the aneurysm. Cartilage, on the other hand, being elastic, yields before
may escape while the adjacent bones are destroyed (Fig. 71). The skin
over the tumour becomes thinned and stretched, until finally a slough
[Illustration: FIG. 72.--Sacculated Aneurysm of Abdominal Aorta nearly
filled with laminated clot. Note greater density of clot towards
In the progress of an aneurysm towards rupture, timely clotting may
been arrested there is apt to be extension in another, with imminence of
artery to a tumour, a mass of enlarged lymph glands, or an inflammatory
of the swelling, although it arrests the pulsation, does not produce any
diminution in the size or tension of the swelling, and when the pressure
Fluid swellings overlying an artery, such as cysts, abscesses, or
be distinguished from the true expansion of an aneurysm. Compression of
the artery makes no difference in the size or tension of the swelling.
in that they are not diminished in size by compression of the main
The exaggerated pulsation sometimes observed in the abdominal aorta, the
"pulsating aorta" seen in women, should not be mistaken for aneurysm.
#Prognosis.#--When _natural cure_ occurs it is usually brought about by
the formation of laminated clot, which gradually increases in amount
till it fills the sac. Sometimes a portion of the clot in the sac is
leading to thrombosis which first occludes the artery and then extends
into the sac.
The progress of natural cure is indicated by the aneurysm becoming
cure is complete the expansile pulsation is lost, and there remains a
and an anastomotic circulation is established.
An aneurysm may prove _fatal_ by exerting pressure on important
suppuration. _Pressure_ symptoms are usually most serious from aneurysms
situated in the neck, thorax, or skull. Sudden fatal _syncope_ is not
infrequent in cases of aneurysm of the thoracic aorta.
surface, or into the cellular tissue. The first haemorrhage is often
slight and stops naturally, but it soon recurs, and is so profuse,
especially when the blood escapes externally, that it rapidly proves
spreads widely through the tissues, exerting great pressure on the
surrounding structures.
pain in the part, and the patient becomes pale, cold, and faint. If a
sudden alteration in the size, shape, and tension of the aneurysm,
together with loss of pulsation, may be the only local signs. When the
bleeding is profuse, however, the parts beyond the aneurysm become
lost. The arrest of the blood supply may result in gangrene. Sometimes
the pressure of the extravasated blood causes the skin to slough and,
later, give way, and fatal haemorrhage results.
The _treatment_ is carried out on the same lines as for a ruptured
artery (p. 261), it being remembered, however, that the artery is
diseased and does not lend itself to reconstructive procedures.
_Suppuration_ may occur in the vicinity of an aneurysm, and the aneurysm
the pus is mixed with broken-down blood-clot, and finally free
has incised such an abscess without having recognised its association
with aneurysm, with tragic results.
#Treatment.#--In treating an aneurysm, the indications are to imitate
_Constitutional treatment_ consists in taking measures to reduce the
arterial tension and to diminish the force of the heart's action. The
patient must be kept in bed. A dry and non-stimulating diet is
probably depends on its depressing action on the heart and its
use of opiates, of which heroin is the most efficient.
#Endo-aneurysmorrhaphy.#--The operation devised by Rudolf Matas in 1888
aims at closing the opening between the sac and its feeding artery, and
_Extirpation of the Sac--The Old Operation._--The procedure which goes
by this name consists in exposing the aneurysm, incising the sac,
clearing out the clots, and ligating the artery above and below the sac.
This method is suitable to sacculated aneurysm of the limbs, so long as
they are circumscribed and free from complications. It has been
external iliac arteries. It is not applicable to cases in which there is
ligation of the artery. The continuity of the artery may be restored by
grafting into the gap left after excision of the sac a segment of the
great saphena vein.
_Ligation of the Artery._--The object of tying the artery is to diminish
coagulates both in the sac and in the feeding artery. The ligature may
the artery beyond--distal ligation.
_Proximal Ligation._--The ligature may be applied immediately above the
sac (Anel, 1710) or at a distance above (John Hunter, 1785). The
_Hunterian operation_ ensures that the ligature is applied to a part of
undisturbed by the proximity of the sac; the best example is the
Hunter's canal for popliteal aneurysm; it is on record that Syme
occasions.
It is to be noted that the Hunterian ligature does not aim at
_arresting_ the flow of blood through the sac, but is designed so to
of laminated clot. The development of the collateral circulation which
attended with just that amount of return stream which favours the
deposit of laminated clot, and consequently the cure of the aneurysm;
of the blood in the sac, or only to allow of the formation of a red
thrombus which may in its turn be dispersed so that pulsation in the sac
recurrent pulsation may only be temporary; the formation of laminated
aneurysm.
The least desirable result of the Hunterian ligature is met with in
with the sac directly.
_Distal Ligation._--The tying of the artery beyond the sac, or of its
two branches where it bifurcates (Brasdor, 1760, and Wardrop, 1825), may
arrest or only diminish the flow of blood through the sac. It is less
successful than the proximal ligature, and is therefore restricted to
aneurysms so situated as not to be amenable to other methods; for
may be ligated near its bifurcation, or in aneurysm of the innominate
artery, the carotid and subclavian arteries are tied at the seat of
election.
_Compression._--Digital compression of the feeding artery has been given
fine, highly tempered steel needles through the tissues overlying the
aneurysm, and through its outer wall. The needles are made to touch the
movement to them which causes them to scarify the inner surface of the
sac. White thrombus forms on the rough surface produced, and leads to
being shifted from time to time, the projecting ends being surrounded
The _Moore-Corradi method_ consists in introducing through the wall of
pole of a galvanic battery is attached to the wire, and the negative
pole placed over the patient's back. A current, varying in strength from
needle is then withdrawn, but the wire is left _in situ_. The results
are somewhat similar to those obtained by needling, but the clot formed
on the large coil of wire is more extensive.
[Illustration: FIG. 73.--Radiogram of Innominate Aneurysm after
treatment by the Moore-Corradi method. Two feet of finely drawn silver
wire were introduced. The patient, a woman, aet. 47, lived for ten months
after operation, free from pain (cf. Fig. 75).]
Colt's method of wiring has been mainly used in the treatment of
abdominal aneurysm; gilt wire in the form of a wisp is introduced
through the cannula and expands into an umbrella shape.
cent. solution of white gelatin in sterilised water, at a temperature of
about 100 o F., are injected into the subcutaneous tissue of the abdomen
weeks improvement may begin. The clot which forms is liable to soften
gangrene. Amputation at the shoulder was performed by Fergusson in a
through the sac.
The essential feature of a traumatic aneurysm is that it is produced by
some form of injury which divides all the coats of the artery. The walls
of the injured vessel are presumably healthy, but they form no part of
the sac of the aneurysm. The sac consists of the condensed and thickened
tissues around the artery.
The injury to the artery may be a subcutaneous one such as a tear by a
slowly escapes into the surrounding tissues, gradually displacing and
the injury, from gradual stretching of the fibrous cicatrix by which the
wound in the wall of the artery has been closed. The gradual stretching
of this cicatrix results in condensation of the surrounding structures
which form the sac, on the inner aspect of which laminated clot is
operative measures dealing with the sac and the adjacent segment of the
arterio-venous aneurysm. Two varieties are recognised--one in which the
vein communicates with the artery through the medium of a sac--_varicose
aneurysm_.
and vein. In former times the most common situation was at the bend of
frequent result of injuries by modern high-velocity bullets--for
In _aneurysmal varix_ the higher blood pressure in the artery forces
arterial blood into the vein, which near the point of communication with
the artery tends to become dilated, and to form a thick-walled sac,
beyond which the vessel and its tributaries are distended and tortuous.
The clinical features resemble those associated with varicose veins, but
the entrance of arterial blood into the dilated veins causes them to
pulsate, and produces in them a vibratory thrill and a loud murmur. In
those at the groin, the distension of the veins may be so great that
they look like sinuses running through the muscles, a feature that must
As the condition tends to remain stationary, the support of an elastic
bandage is all that is required; but when the condition progresses and
causes serious inconvenience, it may be necessary to cut down and expose
the communication between the artery and vein, and, after separating the
vessels, to close the opening in each by suture; this may be difficult
collateral circulation beforehand (Makins).
aneurysm, the sac becoming adherent to an adjacent vein, and ultimately
vein is established, and the clinical features are those of a
combination of aneurysm and aneurysmal varix.
As there is little tendency to spontaneous cure, and as the aneurysm is
liable to increase in size and finally to rupture, operative treatment
aneurysmal varix, and at the same time incising the sac, turning out the
clots, and ligating any branches which open into the sac. If it can be
avoided, the vein should not be ligated.
the supra-sternal notch, but usually towards the right side of the
sternum--with an increased area of dulness on percussion. With the
prominent symptom, and is largely referable to the pressure of the
aneurysm on the vertebrae or the sternum, causing erosion of these bones.
Pressure on the thoracic veins and on the air-passage causes cyanosis
difficulty in swallowing. The left recurrent nerve may be stretched or
pressed upon as it hooks round the arch of the aorta, and hoarseness of
the voice and a characteristic "brassy" cough may result from paralysis
of the muscles of the larynx which it supplies. The vagus, the phrenic,
and the spinal nerves may also be pressed upon. When the aneurysm is on
the transverse part of the arch, the trachea is pulled down with each
Aneurysm of the descending aorta may, after eroding the bodies of the
vertebrae (Fig. 71) and posterior portions of the ribs, form a swelling
in the back to the left of the spine.
Inasmuch as obliteration of the sac and the feeding artery is out of the
question, surgical treatment is confined to causing coagulation of the
blood in an extension or pouching of the sac, which, making its way
through the parietes of the chest, threatens to rupture externally. This
may be achieved by Macewen's needles or by the introduction of wire into
referred to has been followed by such an amount of improvement that the
patient has been able to resume a laborious occupation for one or more
years. Christopher Heath found that improvement followed ligation of the
left common carotid in aneurysm of the transverse part of the aortic
[Illustration: FIG. 74.--Thoracic Aneurysm, threatening to rupture
externally, but prevented from doing so by Macewen's needling. The
abdomen may be affected, the most common seats are in the aorta itself,
just above the origin of the coeliac artery and at the bifurcation.
The _clinical features_ vary with the site of the aneurysm and with its
exhibits expansile pulsation, forms, usually towards the left of the
middle line. It may extend upwards under cover of the ribs, downwards
towards the pelvis, or backward towards the loin. On palpation a
constant nor characteristic. Pain is usually present; it may be
presses on the vertebrae and erodes them, the symptoms simulate those of
The _diagnosis_ has to be made from solid or cystic tumours overlying
the artery; from a "pulsating aorta"; and from spinal caries; much help
The condition usually proves fatal, either by the aneurysm bursting into
tissue.
The Moore-Corradi method has been successfully employed, access to the
patient survived forty-eight days.
#Innominate aneurysm# may be of the fusiform or of the sacculated
variety, and is frequently associated with pouching of the aorta. It
aortic aneurysm, occur. The pulses in the right upper extremity and in
the right carotid and its branches are diminished and delayed. Pressure
on the right brachial plexus causes shooting pain down the arm and
muscular paresis on that side. Vaso-motor disturbances and contraction
of the pupil on the right side may result from pressure on the
[Illustration: FIG. 75.--Innominate Aneurysm in a woman, aet. 47, eight
The available methods of treatment are ligation of the right common
carotid and third part of the right subclavian (Wardrop's operation), of
and globular (Sheen). If ligation is found to be impracticable, the
#Carotid Aneurysms.#--Aneurysm of the _common carotid_ is more frequent
frequently met with in women. From its position the swelling is liable
air-passage, and on the oesophagus, giving rise to symptoms referable to
Aneurysm near the origin has to be diagnosed from subclavian,
precision the trunk from which an aneurysm at the root of the neck
dilatation. A careful consideration of the position in which the
the vessel involved.
Tumours of the thyreoid, enlarged lymph glands, and fatty and
sarcomatous tumours can usually be distinguished from aneurysm by the
history of the swelling and by physical examination. Cystic tumours and
transmitted to them. The fact that compression of the vessel does not
Proximal ligation in the case of high aneurysms, or distal ligation in
those situated at the root of the neck, is more certain. Extirpation of
the sac is probably the best method of treatment, especially in those of
The _external carotid_ and the cervical portion of the _internal
carotid_ are seldom the primary seat of aneurysm, although they are
liable to be implicated by the upward spread of an aneurysm at the
on the pharynx and larynx, and on the hypoglossal nerve. Aneurysm of the
internal carotid is of special importance on account of the way in which
closely simulating a tonsillar abscess. Cases are on record in which
disastrous results.
wounds. The communication is usually between the common carotid artery
and the internal jugular vein. The resulting interference with the
cerebral circulation causes headache, giddiness, and other brain
#Intracranial aneurysm# involves the internal carotid and its branches,
or the basilar artery, and appears to be more frequently associated with
proves fatal by rupture, and intracranial haemorrhage. The treatment is
to ligate the common carotid or the vertebral artery in the neck,
according to the seat of the aneurysm.
embrace a number of pathological conditions, including aneurysm, in
which the chief symptoms are pulsation in the orbit and protrusion of
eyelids, and a distinct thrill and murmur, which can be controlled by
These symptoms are due, in the majority of cases, to an aneurysmal varix
of the internal carotid artery and cavernous sinus, which is often
traumatic in origin, being produced either by fracture of the base of
due to aneurysm of the ophthalmic artery, to thrombosis of the cavernous
sinus, and, in rare instances, to cirsoid aneurysm.
If compression of the common carotid is found to arrest the pulsation,
#Subclavian Aneurysm.#--Subclavian aneurysm is usually met with in men
who follow occupations involving constant use of the shoulder--for
example, dock-porters and coal-heavers. It is more common on the right
side.
and to the outer side of the sterno-mastoid muscle. It occasionally
extends towards the thorax, where it may become adherent to the pleura.
from pressure on the veins and nerves as they pass under the clavicle;
and pressure on the phrenic nerve may induce hiccough. The aneurysm is
The conditions most likely to be mistaken for it are a soft, rapidly
On account of the relations of the artery and of its branches, treatment
is attended with greater difficulty and danger in subclavian than in
almost any other form of external aneurysm. The available operative
measures are proximal ligation of the innominate, and distal ligation.
In some cases it has been found necessary to combine distal ligation
with amputation at the shoulder-joint, to prevent the collateral
circulation maintaining the flow through the aneurysm. Matas' operation
#Axillary Aneurysm.#--This is usually met with in the right arm of
labouring men and sailors, and not infrequently follows an injury in the
region of the shoulder. The vessel may be damaged by the head of a
dislocated humerus or in attempts to reduce the dislocation, by the
fragments of a fractured bone, or by a stab or cut. Sometimes the vein
also is injured and an arterio-venous aneurysm established.
soon attain a large size, filling up the axilla, and displacing the
clavicle upwards. This renders compression of the third part of the
into the neck, or, extending inwards may form adhesions to the chest
wall, and, after eroding the ribs, to the pleura.
The usual symptoms of aneurysm are present, and the pressure effects on
the veins and nerves are similar to those produced by an aneurysm of the
are not infrequent when there are adhesions to the chest wall and
pleura. Rupture may take place externally, into the shoulder-joint, or
Extirpation of the sac is the operation of choice, but, if this is
recourse to.
traumatic origin, and is best treated by excision of the sac.
median basilic vein,--may be treated, according to the amount of
#Inguinal Aneurysm# (_Aneurysm of the Iliac and Femoral
Arteries_).--Aneurysms appearing in the region of Poupart's ligament may
have their origin in the external or common iliac arteries or in the
upper part of the femoral. On account of the tension of the fascia lata,
downwards into the thigh. Sometimes a constriction occurs across the
The pressure exerted on the nerves and veins of the lower extremity
causes pain, congestion, and oedema of the limb. Rupture may take place
the pelvic bones, and from an abscess or a mass of enlarged lymph glands
The method of treatment that has met with most success is ligation of
the common or external iliac, reached either by reflecting the
going through the peritoneal cavity (trans-peritoneal operation).
#Gluteal Aneurysm.#--An aneurysm in the buttock may arise from the
superior or from the inferior gluteal artery, but by the time it forms a
which it gives rise are pain down the limb from pressure on the sciatic
nerve, and interference with the movements at the hip.
into the pelvis.
#Femoral Aneurysm.#--Aneurysm of the femoral artery beyond the origin of
the profunda branch is usually traumatic in origin, and is more common
Matas' operation and ligation of the external iliac.
Aneurysm of the _profunda femoris_ is distinguished from that of the
unaffected, and by the normal artery being felt pulsating over or
alongside the sac.
stab, the communication with the vein may involve the main trunk of the
femoral artery. Should operative interference become necessary as a
result of progressive increase in size of the tumour, or progressive
distension of the veins of the limb, an attempt should be made to
separate the vessels concerned and to close the opening in each by
communication; gangrene of the limb may supervene, and we have observed
a case in which the gangrene extended up to the junction of the middle
and lower thirds of the thigh, and in which recovery followed upon
#Popliteal Aneurysm.#--This is the most common surgical aneurysm, and is
not infrequently met with in both limbs. It is generally due to disease
of the artery, and repeated slight strains, which are so liable to occur
knee in riding.
The aneurysm is usually of the sacculated variety, and may spring from
the front or from the back of the vessel. It may exert pressure on the
bones and ligaments of the joint, and it has been known to rupture into
accompany these changes often lead to an erroneous diagnosis of joint
disease. The sac may press upon the popliteal artery or vein and their
Pressure on the tibial and common peroneal nerves gives rise to severe
The differential diagnosis is to be made from abscess, bursal cyst,
success which attends the Hunterian operation is evidenced by the fact
that Syme performed it thirty-seven times without a single failure. If
it fails, the old operation should be considered, but it is a more
serious operation, and one which is more liable to be followed by
even the removal of a portion of it, is not necessarily followed by
gangrene. The risk of gangrene is diminished by a course of digital
compression of the femoral artery, before operating on the aneurysm.
space. It is characterised by the usual symptoms, and is treated by
palliative measures, or by ligation of the artery above and below the
point of communication.
CHAPTER XV
THE LYMPH VESSELS AND GLANDS
Anatomy and Physiology--INJURIES OF LYMPH VESSELS--_Wounds of
    _Varieties_--Lymphangiectasis--Filarial
    GLANDS--Lymphadenitis: _Septic_; _Tuberculous_;
    _Syphilitic_--Lymphadenoma--Leucocythaemia--TUMOURS.
#Surgical Anatomy and Physiology.#--Lymph is essentially blood plasma,
vessels take origin in the lymph spaces of the tissues and in the
walls of serous cavities, and they usually run alongside blood
course of the lymph trunks are the _lymph glands_, which possess a
definite capsule and are composed of a reticulated connective tissue,
the spaces of which are packed with leucocytes. The glands act as
circulating in the lymph, but also living elements, such as cancer cells
or bacteria. As it passes through a gland the lymph is brought into
is always a struggle between the organisms and the leucocytes, so that
or preventing the passage of bacteria and their products into the
the blood stream, must usually overcome the resistance of several
glands.
Lymph glands are, for the most part, arranged in groups or chains, such
the number of glands in the axilla which takes place during lactation;
when this function ceases, many of the glands become involuted and are
transformed into fat, and in the event of a subsequent lactation they
are again developed. After glands have been removed by operation, new
The following are the more important groups of glands, and the areas
drained by them in the head and neck and in the extremities.
#Head and Neck.#--_The anterior auricular (parotid and pre-auricular)
glands_ lie beneath the parotid fascia in front of the ear, and some
the parts about the temple, cheek, eyelids, and auricle, and are
frequently the seat of tuberculous disease. _The occipital gland_,
situated over the origin of the trapezius from the superior curved line,
drains the top and back of the head; it is rarely infected. _The
posterior auricular (mastoid) glands_ lie over the mastoid process, and
six in number--lie along the lower order of the mandible from the
closely connected with the submaxillary salivary gland. They receive
part of tongue, and the alae nasi, and from the pre-auricular glands. The
frequently infected with tubercle, with epithelioma which has spread to
glands_ lie in or close to the median line between the anterior bellies
for them to be the seat of tubercle, but in epithelioma of the lower lip
above the hyoid bone, and receives lymph from the tongue. _The
the external jugular vein, and receives lymph from the occipital and
auricular glands and from the auricle. _The sterno-mastoid
the sterno-mastoid muscle, some of them lying beneath the muscle. They
are commonly enlarged in secondary syphilis. _The superior deep cervical
(internal jugular) glands_--from six to twenty in number--form a
continuous chain along the internal jugular vein, beneath the
sterno-mastoid muscle. They drain the various groups of glands which lie
nearer the surface, also the interior of the skull, the larynx, trachea,
thyreoid, and lower part of the pharynx, and pour their lymph into the
large gland (the tonsillar gland) which lies behind the posterior belly
of the digastric, and rests in the angle between the internal jugular
and common facial veins. It is commonly enlarged in affections of the
sterno-mastoid muscle, and surround the accessory nerve before it
perforates the muscle. The deep cervical glands are commonly infected by
tubercle and also by epithelioma secondary to disease in the tongue or
throat. _The inferior deep cervical (supra-clavicular) glands_ lie in
the posterior triangle, above the clavicle. They receive lymph from the
lowest cervical glands, from the upper part of the chest wall, and from
the highest axillary glands. They are frequently infected in cancer of
undertaken, as difficulties are liable to ensue in connection with the
of the median line upon the rectus capitis anticus major muscle and in
part of the lymph from the posterior wall of the pharynx, the interior
of the nose and its accessory cavities, the auditory (Eustachian) tube,
and the tympanum. When they are infected with pyogenic organisms or
number, that most commonly present lying about an inch and a half above
the medial epi-condyle, and other and smaller glands may lie along the
medial (internal) bicipital groove or at the bend of the elbow. They
drain the ulnar side of the hand and forearm, and pour their lymph into
the axillary group. The epi-trochlear gland is sometimes enlarged in
syphilis. _The axillary glands_ are arranged in groups: a central group
lies embedded in the axillary fascia and fat, and is often related to an
the subscapular vessels; anterior or pectoral groups lie behind the
glands receive lymph from the arm, mamma, and side of the chest, and
operation for cancer of the breast.
at the termination of the small saphenous vein, and several deeper ones
in relation to the popliteal vessels. They receive lymph from the toes
and foot, and transmit it to the inguinal glands. _The femoral glands_
lie vertically along the upper part of the great saphenous vein, and
participate in pyogenic infections entering through the skin of the toes
and sole of the foot. _The superficial inguinal glands_ lie along the
superficial glands through their relations to the genitals are
frequently the subject of venereal infection, and also of epithelioma
when this disease affects the genitals or anus; they are rarely the seat
of tuberculosis. _The deep inguinal glands_ lie on the medial side of
the femoral vein, and sometimes within the femoral canal. They receive
lymph from the deep lymphatics of the lower limb, and some of the
lymph then passes on through the femoral canal to the external iliac
glands. The extension of malignant disease, whether cancer or sarcoma,
can often be traced along these deeper lymphatics into the pelvis, and
as the obstruction to the flow of lymph increases there is a
limb on the same side.
The glands of the _thorax_ and _abdomen_ will be considered with the
Lymph vessels are divided in all wounds, and the lymph that escapes from
colourless, watery fluid--_lymphorrhagia_; and the opening through which
it escapes is known as a _lymphatic fistula_. This has been observed
obstruction to the lymph stream, and in such cases the lymph, including
four to six weeks the discharge of lymph ceases and the wound heals.
_Lymphatic Oedema._--When the lymphatic return from a limb has been
has been completely cleared out in operating for cancer of the
breast,--a condition of lymphatic oedema may result, the arm becoming
Various degrees of the conditions are met with; in the severe forms,
the condition is relieved by elevation of the limb, but not nearly to
connective tissue and hypertrophy of the skin; in advanced cases there
Handley has devised a method of treatment--_lymphangioplasty_--the
object of which is to drain the lymph by embedding a number of silk
angle formed by the junction of the left internal jugular and subclavian
channels, or the duct may be double throughout its course. There is a
milky fluid--chyle--may at once escape from it. The jets are rhythmical
and coincide with expiration. The injury may, however, not be observed
at the time of operation, but later through the dressings being soaked
with chyle--_chylorrhoea_. If the wound involves the only existing main
duct and all the chyle escapes, the patient suffers from intense thirst,
usually the case, only one of several collateral channels is implicated,
the loss of chyle may be of little moment, as the discharge usually
ceases. If the wound heals so that the chyle is prevented from escaping,
a fluctuating swelling may form beneath the scar; in course of time it
An attempt should be made to close the wound in the duct by means of a
fine suture; failing this, the duct must be occluded by a ligature as if
it were a bleeding artery. The tissues are then stitched over it and the
skin wound accurately closed, so as to obtain primary union, firm
pressure being applied by dressings and an elastic webbing bandage. Even
_Subcutaneous rupture of the thoracic duct_ may result from a crush of
are physical signs of fluid in one or other of these situations, but, as
a rule, the nature of the lesion is only recognised when chyle is
DISEASES OF LYMPH VESSELS
results from some primary source of pyogenic infection in the skin. This
may be a wound or a purulent blister, and the streptococcus pyogenes is
the organism most frequently present. _Septic_ lymphangitis is commonly
met with in those who, from the nature of their occupation, handle
infective material. A _gonococcal_ form has been observed in those
inflammation of the surrounding cellular tissue--_peri-lymphangitis_.
spreading cellulitis may supervene.
The _clinical features_ resemble those of other pyogenic infections, and
the nearest lymph glands. These correspond to the inflamed vessels, and
are the seat of burning pain and tenderness. The associated glands are
septicaemia. When the deep lymph vessels alone are involved, the
superficial red lines are absent, but the limb becomes greatly swollen
and pits on pressure.
attacks, the vessels are obliterated by the formation of new connective
tissue and a persistent solid oedema results, culminating in one form of
elephantiasis.
_Treatment._--The primary source of infection is dealt with on the usual
lines. If the lymphangitis affects an extremity, Bier's elastic bandage
more small incisions; in other parts of the body Klapp's suction bells
are employed. An autogenous vaccine may be prepared and injected. When
the condition has subsided, the limb is massaged and evenly bandaged to
role in the spread of tuberculosis, the clinical recognition of the
points, larger, peri-lymphangitic nodules may form and break down into
abscesses and ulcers; the nearest group of glands become infected at an
early stage. When the disease is widely distributed throughout the
illustrated by lupus elephantiasis.
_Syphilitic lymphangitis_ is observed in cases of primary syphilis, in
the nearest lymph glands, and they may themselves become the seat of
cancerous growth forming nodular cords. The permeation of cancer by way
of the lymphatics, described by Sampson Handley, has already been
referred to.
#Lymphangiectasis# is a dilated or varicose condition of lymph vessels.
It is met with as a congenital affection in the tongue and lips, or it
may be acquired as the result of any condition which is attended with
extensive obliteration or blocking of the main lymph trunks. An
interesting type of lymphangiectasis is that which results from the
presence of the _filaria Bancrofti_ in the vessels, and is observed
chiefly in the groin, spermatic cord, and scrotum of persons who have
doughy swelling, varying in size from a walnut to a cocoa-nut; it may
lymphangitis during which the swelling becomes painful and tender. These
an increase in the size of the swelling, which may extend along the
scrotum. On dissection, the swelling is found to be made up of dilated,
undergone fibrosis, with giant-cell formation and eosinophile
turbid, in the latter case resembling chyle. The affection is frequently
hernia, lipoma, or cystic pouching of the great saphenous vein. It is
confirmed by finding the recently dead or dying worms in the inflamed
lymph glands.
formation of lymphatic sinuses and only afford temporary relief.
cavities and channels filled with lymph and freely communicating with
one another. The cavities result either from the new formation of lymph
spaces or vessels, or from the dilatation of those which already exist;
their walls are composed of fibro-areolar tissue lined by endothelium
and strengthened by non-striped muscle. They are rarely provided with a
definite capsule, and frequently send prolongations of their substance
between and into muscles and other structures in their vicinity. They
are of congenital origin and usually make their appearance at or shortly
after birth. When the tumour is made up of a meshwork of caverns and
channels, it is called a _cavernous lymphangioma_; when it is composed
presenting many of the characters of a subcutaneous haemangioma, but it
is not capable of being emptied by pressure, it does not become tense
swelling is punctured or explored by operation. If treatment is called
for, it is carried out on the same lines as for haemangioma, by means of
electrolysis, igni-puncture, or excision. Complete excision is rarely
not necessary for cure, as the parts that remain undergo cicatrisation.
(From a photograph lent by Dr. Lediard.)]
The _cystic lymphangioma_, _lymphatic cyst_, or _congenital cystic
a considerable size (Fig. 76); less frequent situations are the groin,
and the floor of the mouth, where it constitutes one form of ranula.
The nature of these swellings is to be recognised by their situation, by
change, and, like the haemangioma, they sometimes undergo spontaneous
taking origin in the scalp, ear, or throat.
neck, and should not be lightly undertaken; parts left behind may be
induced to cicatrise by inserting a tube of radium and leaving it for a
Lymphangiomas are met with in the abdomen in the form of _omental
cysts_.
DISEASES OF LYMPH GLANDS
#Lymphadenitis.#--Inflammation of lymph glands results from the advent
of an irritant, usually bacterial or toxic, brought to the glands by the
afferent lymph vessels. These vessels may share in the inflammation and
through the blood-stream.
in the inguinal glands for long periods, and only give rise to
lymphadenitis if the glands be subsequently subjected to injury. The
glands most frequently affected are those in the neck, axilla, and
groin.
The characters of the lymphadenitis vary with the nature of the
irritant. Sometimes it is mild and evanescent, as in the glandular
enlargement in the neck which attends tonsillitis and other forms of
sore throat. Sometimes it is more persistent, as in the enlargement
eczema of the scalp, and otorrhoea; and it is possible that this indolent
enlargement predisposes to tuberculous infection. A similar enlargement
is met with in the axilla in cases of chronic interstitial mastitis, and
genitals, such as balanitis.
is towards the formation of an abscess. This is illustrated in the
axillary glands as a result of infected wounds of the fingers; in the
the inguinal glands in gonorrhoea and soft sore; and in the cervical
glands in the severer forms of sore throat associated with diphtheria
and scarlet fever. The most acute suppurations result from infection
with streptococci.
Superficial glands, when inflamed and suppurating, become enlarged,
tender, fixed, and matted to one another. In the glands of the groin the
suppurative process is often remarkably sluggish; purulent foci form in
the interior of individual glands, and some time may elapse before the
the suppuration rapidly involves the surrounding cellular tissue, and
the clinical features are those of an acute cellulitis and deeply seated
abscess. When this is incised the necrosed glands may be found lying in
the pus, and on bacteriological examination are found to be swarming
with streptococci. In suppuration of the axillary glands the abscess may
fascia and pectoral muscles, according to the group of glands involved.
The _diagnosis_ of septic lymphadenitis is usually easy. The indolent
commencing tuberculous disease, except by the use of the tuberculin
peripheral source of irritation.
_Treatment._--The first indication is to discover and deal with the
will usually be followed by recovery. In the acute forms following on
pyogenic infection, the best results are obtained from the hyperaemic
treatment carried out by means of suction bells. If suppuration is not
thereby prevented, or if it has already taken place, each separate
the suction bell is persevered with. If there is a large periglandular
abscess, as is often the case, in the neck and axilla, the opening may
require to be made by Hilton's method, and it may be necessary to insert
[Illustration: FIG. 77.--Tuberculous Cervical Gland with abscess
formation in subcutaneous cellular tissue, in a boy aet. 10.]
#Tuberculous Disease of Glands.#--This is a disease of great frequency
and importance. The tubercle bacilli usually gain access to the gland
through the afferent lymph vessels, which convey them from some lesion
of the surface within the area drained by them. Tuberculous infection
disease. In the early stages the gland is enlarged, it may be to many
of infection in the shape of bacilli and of characteristic giant and
minute yellow foci which tend to enlarge and in time to become
caseous mass. This caseous material is surrounded by the thickened
capsule which, as a result of peri-adenitis, tends to become adherent to
and fused with surrounding structures, and particularly with layers of
fascia and with the walls of veins. The caseated tissue often remains
unchanged for long periods; it may become calcified, but more frequently
#Tuberculous disease in the cervical glands# is a common accompaniment
or sequel of adenoids, enlarged tonsils, carious teeth, pharyngitis,
a chance of entry into the lymph vessels, in which they are carried to
the glands, where they give rise to disease.
The enlargement may affect only one gland, usually below the angle of
disease affects several glands, on one or on both sides of the neck.
When the disease commences in the pre-auricular or submaxillary glands,
it tends to spread to those along the carotid sheath: when the posterior
those along the posterior border of the sterno-mastoid. In many cases
clavicle. They are at first discrete and movable, and may even vary in
structures in their vicinity,--and notably to the internal jugular
vein,--a point of importance in regard to their removal by operation.
periods without further change. It is possible that the tuberculous
tissue may undergo cicatrisation. More commonly suppuration ensues, and
factor being usually derived from the throat, it may take on active
features.
[Illustration: FIG. 78.--Mass of Tuberculous Glands removed from Axilla
The transition from the solid to the liquefied stage is attended with
and globular, and finally fluctuation can be elicited.
perforated and a cold abscess, often much larger than the gland from
which it took origin, forms between the fascia and the overlying skin.
The further stages--reddening, undermining of skin and external rupture,
they heal and then break out again; sometimes the skin becomes infected,
extruded; the resulting scars are extremely unsightly, being puckered or
bridled, or hypertrophied like keloid.
While the disease is most common in childhood and youth, it may be met
with even in advanced life; and although often associated with impaired
health and unhealthy surroundings, it may affect those who are
_Diagnosis._--The chief importance lies in differentiating tuberculous
possible from the history and from the nature of the enlargement. Signs
of liquefaction and suppuration support the diagnosis of tubercle. If
any doubt remains, one of the glands should be removed and submitted to
microscopical examination. Other forms of sarcoma, and the enlargement
of an accessory thyreoid, are less likely to be confused with
tuberculous glands. Calcified tuberculous glands give definite shadows
tuberculosis, but is differentiated by its association with cancer in
the mouth or throat, and by the characteristic, stone-like induration of
retro-pharyngeal abscess, as well as from congenital and other cystic
swellings in the neck.
_Prognosis._--Next to lupus, glandular disease is of all tuberculous
lesions the least dangerous to life; but while it is the rule to recover
from tuberculous disease of glands with or without an operation, it is
life.
_Treatment._--There is considerable difference of opinion regarding the
the undoubted possibility of natural cure, are satisfied with promoting
this by measures directed towards improving the general health, by the
X-rays and to sunlight. Others again, influenced by the risk of
breaking down, "expectant measures" may be persevered with.
If, on the other hand, the disease exhibits aggressive tendencies, the
question of operation should be considered. The undesirable results of
the breaking down and liquefaction of the diseased gland may be avoided
because of the number and deep situation of the glands to be removed,
and of the adhesions to surrounding structures. The skin incision must
area, and to avoid disfigurement should, whenever possible, be made in
the line of the natural creases of the skin. In exposing the glands the
common facial and other venous trunks may require to be clamped and
tied. Care must be taken not to injure the important nerves,
particularly the accessory, the vagus, and the phrenic. The
are also liable to be injured. The dissection is rendered easier and is
attended with less risk of injury to the nerves, if the patient is
a knife, the conical scissors of Mayo are employed. When the glands are
sitting. (_Op. Surg._, p. 189.)
If the tonsils are enlarged they should not be removed at the same time,
as, by so doing, there is a risk of pyogenic infection from the throat
being carried to the wound in the neck, but they should be removed,
after an interval, to prevent relapse of disease in the glands.
_When the skin is broken_ and caseous tuberculous tissue is exposed,
healing is promoted by cutting away diseased skin, removing the
and to the X-rays is often beneficial in these cases.
#Tuberculous disease in the axillary glands# may be a result of
to form a large tumour which fills up the axillary space. The disease
progresses more rapidly than it does in the cervical glands, and almost
always goes on to suppuration with the formation of sinuses.
Conservative measures need not be considered, as the only satisfactory
treatment is excision, and that without delay.
#Tuberculous disease in the glands of the groin# is comparatively rare.
We have chiefly observed it in the femoral glands as a result of
inoculation tubercle on the toes or sole of the foot. The affected
overlying skin give rise to fungating ulcers. The treatment consists in
attended with troublesome haemorrhage from the numerous veins that
described with the surgery of regions.
prominent feature of acquired syphilis, especially in the form of the
general enlargement of glands that occurs in secondary syphilis.
rapidly enlarges to the size of a walnut, and may then persist for a
long period without further change; if it breaks down, the overlying
skin is destroyed and the caseated tissue of the gumma exposed.
#Lymphadenoma.#--_Hodgkin's Disease_ (Pseudo-leukaemia of German
authors).--This is a rare disease, the origin of which is as yet
unknown, but analogy would suggest that it is due to infection with a
glands, most commonly those in the cervical region (Fig. 80).
[Illustration: FIG. 80.--Chronic Hodgkin's Disease in a boy aet. 11.]
The glands are usually larger than in tuberculosis, and they remain
longer discrete and movable; they are firm in consistence, and on
section present a granular appearance due to overgrowth of the
connective-tissue framework. In time the glandular masses may form
enormous projecting tumours, the swelling being added to by lymphatic
The enlargement spreads along the chain of glands to those above the
(Fig. 81). Later, the glands in the groin become enlarged, and it is
probable that the infection has spread from the neck along the
branched off to the iliac and inguinal groups.
Two clinical types are recognised, one in which the disease progresses
years; the other, in which the disease is more rapidly disseminated and
causes death in from twelve to eighteen months.
side of neck and left axilla, in a woman aet. 44. Three years' duration.]
In the acute form, the health suffers, there is fever, and the glands
and mammae may be enlarged; the glandular swellings press on important
structures, such as the trachea, oesophagus, or great veins, and symptoms
referable to such pressure manifest themselves.
_Diagnosis._--Considerable difficulty attends the diagnosis of
lymphadenoma at an early stage. The negative results of tuberculin tests
to microscopical examination should be had recourse to. The sections
Lympho-sarcoma can usually be differentiated by the rapid assumption of
the local features of malignant disease, and in a gland removed for
examination, a predominance of small round cells with scanty protoplasm.
_Treatment._--In the acute form of lymphadenoma, treatment is of little
subcutaneous injection; the intravenous administration of neo-salvarsan
successful than any other form of treatment. Excision of glands,
although sometimes beneficial, seldom arrests the progress of the
disease. The ease and rapidity with which large masses of glands may be
shelled out is in remarkable contrast to what is observed in tuberculous
disease. Surgical interference may give relief when important structures
are being pressed upon--tracheotomy, for example, may be required where
#Leucocythaemia.#--This is a disease of the blood and of the
blood-forming organs, in which there is a great increase in the number,
and an alteration of the character, of the leucocytes present in the
blood. It may simulate lymphadenoma, because, in certain forms of the
disease, the lymph glands, especially those in the neck, axilla, and
groin, are greatly enlarged.
TUMOURS OF LYMPH GLANDS
#Primary Tumours.#--_Lympho-sarcoma_, which may be regarded as a sarcoma
rapidly growing tumour consisting of one enlarged gland with numerous
satellites. As the tumour increases in size, the sarcomatous tissue
erupts through the capsule of the gland, and infiltrates the surrounding
tissues, whereby it becomes fixed to these and to the skin.
[Illustration: FIG. 82.--Lympho-Sarcoma removed from Groin. It will be
was removable, followed by the insertion of a tube of radium for ten
extended to nearly five years, when death resulted from a tumour in the
patient, a young man, remained well for over two years and was then lost
sight of.
growth, the characters of which they reproduce. The glands are at first
movable, but soon become fixed both to each other and to their
bone-like hardness; in time they soften, liquefy, and burst through the
skin, forming foul, fungating ulcers. A similar condition is met with in
infected and increase rapidly, so that, when the primary growth is still
glands may already constitute large pigmented tumours.
[Illustration: FIG. 83.--Cancerous Glands in Neck secondary to
the primary growth is a lympho-sarcoma and is situated in the tonsil,
CHAPTER XVI
THE NERVES
Anatomy--INJURIES OF NERVES: Changes in nerves after division;
    secondary suture_--SUBCUTANEOUS INJURIES OF
    NERVES--DISEASES: _Neuritis_; _Tumours_--Surgery of
    the individual nerves: _Brachial neuralgia_; _Sciatica_;
#Anatomy.#--A nerve-trunk is made up of a variable number of bundles of
nerve fibres surrounded and supported by a framework of connective
run without interruption from a nerve cell or _neuron_ in the brain or
spinal medulla to their peripheral terminations in muscle, skin, and
Each nerve fibre consists of a number of nerve fibrils collected into a
central bundle--the axis cylinder--which is surrounded by an envelope,
cylinder is the medullated sheath, composed of a fatty substance known
as myelin. This medullated sheath is interrupted at the nodes of
of the nerve, while the neurolemma and the myelin act as insulating
agents. The axis cylinder depends for its nutrition on the central
developed, and it degenerates if it is separated from its neuron.
_endoneurium_, a delicate connective tissue separating the individual
connective-tissue sheaths.
According to Head and his co-workers, Sherren and Rivers, the afferent
1. Those which subserve _deep sensibility_ and conduct the impulses
produced by pressure as well as those which enable the patient to
and the kinaesthetic sense, which recognises that active contraction of
wrist produces little loss of deep sensibility, unless the tendons are
also cut through. The failure to recognise this form of sensibility has
been largely responsible for the conflicting statements as to the
sensory phenomena following operations for the repair of divided nerves.
and cold. These also endow the hairs with sensibility to pain. They are
3. Those which subserve _epicritic_ sensibility, the most highly
specialised, capable of appreciating light touch, _e.g._ with a wisp of
as separate the points of a pair of compasses 2 cms. apart. These are
the last to regenerate.
A nerve also exerts a trophic influence on the tissues in which it is
distributed.
The researches of Stoffel on the minute anatomy of the larger nerves,
different groups of muscles, have opened up what promises to be a
muscles are not, as was formerly supposed, arranged irregularly and
fortuitously, but that on the contrary the nerve fibres to a particular
In the large nerve-trunks of the limbs he has worked out the exact
position of the bundles for the various groups of muscles, so that in a
cross section of a particular nerve the component bundles can be
spastic paralysis he succeeded in picking out in the nerve-trunk of the
resecting portions of them, in relieving the spasm. In a case of spastic
the elbow. At the lateral side of the median nerve, where it lies in
contact with the biceps muscle, is situated a well-defined and easily
carpi radialis, and the palmaris longus muscles. On incising the sheath
of the nerve this bundle can be readily dissected up and its identity
confirmed by stimulating it with a very weak galvanic current. An inch
or more of the bundle is then resected.
Nerves are liable to be cut or torn across, bruised, compressed,
stretched, or torn away from their connections with the spinal medulla.
result of accidental wounds, especially above the wrist, where the
ulnar, median, and radial nerves are frequently cut across, and in
_Changes in Structure and Function._--The mere interruption of the
continuity of a nerve results in degeneration of its fibres, the myelin
of the lesion, and does not even involve all the nerve fibres. In the
distal end, it extends throughout the entire peripheral distribution of
their trophic nerve cells in the spinal medulla. Immediate suturing of
the ends does not affect the degeneration of the distal segment. The
months.
supplied by the nerve are immediately paralysed, the area to which it
begin to atrophy from loss of the trophic influence.
#Nerves divided in Amputation.#--In the case of nerves divided in an
amputation, there is an active, although necessarily abortive, attempt
especially if the nerves have been cut so as to be exposed in the wound,
as "amputation" or "stump neuromas" (Fig. 84).
When the nerves in a stump have not been cut sufficiently short, they
may become involved in the cicatrix, and it may be necessary, on account
of pain, to free them from their adhesions, and to resect enough of the
difficult, a portion may be resected from each of the nerve-trunks at a
higher level; and if this fails to give relief, a fresh amputation may
be performed. When there is agonising pain dependent upon an ascending
neuritis, it may be necessary to resect the corresponding posterior
nerve roots within the vertebral canal.
[Illustration: FIG. 84.--Stump Neuromas of Sciatic Nerve, excised forty
years after the original amputation by Mr. A. G. Miller.]
with extravasation of blood into the connective-tissue sheaths, and is
followed by degeneration of the contused nerve fibres. Function is
formation of new nerve fibres.
When a nerve is _torn across_ or badly _crushed_--as, for example, by a
fractured bone--the changes are similar to those in a divided nerve, and
the ultimate result depends on the amount of separation between the ends
_Involvement of Nerves in Scar Tissue._--Pressure or traction may be
exerted upon a nerve by contracting scar tissue, or a process of
neuritis or perineuritis may be induced.
out the scar, and along with it the ends of the nerves pressed upon.
When a nerve-trunk, such as the sciatic, is involved in cicatricial
tissue, the nerve must be exposed and freed from its surroundings
(_neurolysis_), and then stretched so as to tear any adhesions that may
be present above or below the part exposed. It may be advisable to
may be buried in the substance of the triceps, or it may be surrounded
by a segment of vein or portion of fat-bearing fascia.
_Injuries of nerves resulting from_ #gun-shot wounds# include: (1) those
in which the nerve is directly damaged by the bullet, and (2) those in
its vicinity or by callus following fracture of an adjacent bone. The
primary injuries include contusion, partial or complete division, and
perforation of the nerve-trunk. One of the most constant symptoms is the
early occurrence of severe neuralgic pain, and this is usually
#Regeneration.#--_Process of Repair when the Ends are in Contact._--_If
remain in contact, they become united, and the conducting paths are
re-established by a regeneration of nerve fibres. There is a difference
of opinion as to the method of regeneration. The Wallerian doctrine is
that the axis cylinders in the central end grow downwards, and enter the
nerve sheaths of the distal portion, and continue growing until they
form long chains in both ends of the nerve, and are believed to provide
for the nourishment and support of the actively lengthening axis
not confined to the central end, but that it goes on also in the
peripheral segment, in which, however, the new axis cylinders do not
_If the wound becomes infected_ and suppuration occurs, the young nerve
formation of scar tissue also may constitute a permanent obstacle to new
nerve fibres bridging the gap.
_When the ends are not in contact_, reunion of the divided nerve fibres
proximal end there forms a bulbous swelling, which becomes adherent to
directions, these having failed to reach the distal end because of the
represented by a fibrous cord, the cut end of which is often slightly
of a nerve-trunk necessarily vary with the functions of the affected
nerve. The following description refers to a mixed sensori-motor trunk,
cotton wool stroked gently across the skin; the capacity of
discriminating two points as separate, by a pair of blunt-pointed
compasses; the sensation of pressure, by means of a pencil or other
blunt object; of pain, by pricking or scratching with a needle; and of
After division of a nerve containing sensory fibres, there is an area of
absolute cutaneous insensibility to touch (anaesthesia), to pain
sensibility_; surrounded by an area in which there is loss of sensation
to light touch, inability to recognise minor differences of temperature
the two points of a compass--_loss of epicritic sensibility_ (Head and
Sherren) (Figs. 91, 92).
_Motor Phenomena._--There is immediate and complete loss of voluntary
waste, and within from three to five days, they cease to react to the
faradic current. When tested with the galvanic current, it is found that
circuit when the anode is used as the testing electrode. The loss of
the type of contraction with the constant current, is known as the
_reaction of degeneration_. After a few weeks all electric excitability
is lost. The paralysed muscles undergo fatty degeneration, which attains
its maximum three or four months after the division of the nerve.
Further changes may take place, and result in the transformation of the
deformity known as _paralytic contracture_.
rise in the temperature of the part (2 o to 3 o F.), with redness and
increased vascularity. This is followed by a fall in the local
more persistent, and is associated with swelling of the parts from
_Trophic Phenomena._--Owing to the disappearance of the subcutaneous
fat, the skin is smooth and thin, and may be abnormally dry. The hair is
sole of the foot a perforating ulcer may develop. Arthropathies are
occasionally met with, the joints becoming the seat of a painless
effusion or hydrops, which is followed by fibrous thickening of the
capsular and other ligaments, and terminates in stiffness and fibrous
conditions for repair, and this should be done at the earliest possible
opportunity. (_Op. Surg._, pp. 45, 46.)
suturing of the ends of the nerve is extremely painful, an anaesthetic is
required.
When the wound is healed and while waiting for the restoration of
nerve and of the parts supplied by it. The limb is exercised, massaged,
and douched, and protected from cold and other injurious influences. The
nutrition of the paralysed muscles is further improved by electricity.
to flow downwards in the course of the nerve, with the positive
electrode applied to the spine, and the negative over the affected nerve
near its termination. It is an advantage to have a metronome in the
circuit whereby the current is opened and closed automatically at
intervals, so as to cause contraction of the muscles.
investigated by Head and Sherren, the period between the operation and
is completely restored in six months; electric sensation and motor power
year. When sensation returns, the area of insensibility to pain steadily
appears soon after; and last of all, after a considerable interval,
there is simultaneous return of appreciation of light touch, moderate
progressing has been described by Tinel. He found that a tingling
on the sciatic nerve from sitting on a hard bench, can be elicited on
of a _newly divided nerve_, _e.g._ the common peroneal behind the head
of the fibula, produces no tingling, but when in about three weeks
axis cylinders begin to grow in the proximal end-bulb, local tingling is
sensation being elicited as far down as the young axis cylinders have
reached. When the regeneration of the axis cylinders is complete,
Tinel's sign is present before voluntary movement, muscular tone, or the
normal electrical reactions reappear.
the tingling test is helpful in determining whether or not regeneration
being performed.
Primary suture should not be attempted so long as the wound shows signs
be sutured, however, as soon as the wound is aseptic or has healed.
#Secondary Suture.#--The term secondary suture is applied to the
operation of stitching the ends of the divided nerve after the wound has
healed.
under favourable conditions, the prognosis is good, but a longer time is
required for restoration of function than after primary suture. Purves
Stewart says protopathic sensation is sometimes observed much earlier
There then follows an improvement or disappearance of any trophic
disturbances that may be present. Recovery of motion may be deferred for
want of conductivity in the nerve--and if the muscles have undergone
When suture is found to be impossible, recourse must be had to other
methods, known as nerve bridging and nerve implantation.
that have been interrupted. Within their area of distribution the
paralysis is as complete as if the whole trunk had been cut across. The
uninjured nerve-bundles continue to transmit impulses with the result
that there is a _dissociated paralysis_ within the distribution of the
to electric stimulation, while others behave as if the whole nerve-trunk
fortnight after the injury and causes intense and continuous suffering
which may last for months. Paroxysms of pain may be excited by the
slightest touch or by heat, and the patient usually learns for himself
that the constant application of cold wet cloths allays the pain. The
thermalgic area sweats profusely.
Operative treatment is indicated where there is no sign of improvement
within three months, when recovery is arrested before complete
restoration of function is attained, or when thermalgic pain is
excessive.
#Subcutaneous Injuries of Nerves.#--Several varieties of subcutaneous
injuries of nerves are met with. One of the best known is the
sleeping with the arm resting on the back of a chair or the edge of a
table--the so-called "drunkard's palsy"; and from the pressure of a
crutch in the axilla--"crutch paralysis." In some of these injuries,
notably "drunkard's palsy," the disability appears to be due not to
damage of the nerve, but to overstretching of the extensors of the wrist
and fingers (Jones). A similar form of paralysis is sometimes met with
the pressure exerted by a dislocated bone or by excessive callus, and
from hyper-extension of the arm during anaesthesia.
In all these forms there is impaired sensation, rarely amounting to
anaesthesia, marked muscular wasting, and diminution or loss of voluntary
changes such as blisters, superficial ulcers, and clubbing of the tips
of the fingers. The prognosis is usually favourable, as recovery is the
the electrical reactions are altered, the muscles degenerate, and
recovery may be retarded or may fail to take place.
which is probably incapable of spontaneous recovery, and which can only
be remedied by operation.
for example, a displaced bone or a mass of callus is pressing upon the
nerve, steps must be taken to relieve the pressure, by operation if
crushed or torn across, it should be exposed by incision, and, after
impossible to make a definite diagnosis as to the state of the nerve, it
should be united by sutures.
nerve at the elbow, and is described with injuries of that nerve.
DISEASES OF NERVES
#Traumatic Neuritis.#--This consists in an overgrowth of the
pressure upon the nerve fibres, sometimes resulting in their
involved in scar tissue subsequent to an operation for clearing out the
superficial, may be felt to be swollen. The associated muscles are
wasted and weak, and are subject to twitchings. There are also trophic
The disease is commonest in the nerves of the upper extremity, and the
_Treatment._--Any constitutional condition which predisposes to
neuritis, such as gout, diabetes, or syphilis, must receive appropriate
hot-air and electric baths, and in obstinate cases by blistering or by
the application of Corrigan's button. When such treatment fails the
nerve may be stretched, or, in the case of a purely sensory trunk, a
portion may be excised. Local causes, such as involvement of the nerve
in a scar or in adhesions, may afford indications for operative
under the cognizance of the physician, it may be attended with phenomena
which call for surgical interference. In this country it is commonly due
to alcoholism, but it may result from diabetes or from chronic poisoning
with lead or arsenic, or from bacterial infections and intoxications
influenza, beri-beri, and many other diseases.
but the distribution frequently varies with the cause--the alcoholic
form, for example, mainly affecting the legs, the diphtheritic form the
soft palate and pharynx, and that associated with lead poisoning the
forearms. The essential lesion is a degeneration of the conducting
When the legs are affected the patient may be unable to walk, and the
toes may droop and the heel be drawn up, resulting in one variety of pes
most important trophic phenomena.
Apart from the medical _treatment_, measures must be taken to prevent
deformity, especially when the legs are affected. The bedclothes are
passive movements, and the use of the galvanic current. When deformity
its correction.
NEUROMA[5]
work _On Neuroma, and Neuro-fibromatosis_ (Edinburgh: 1900).
structure, which have their seat in nerves.
A tumour composed of newly formed nerve tissue is spoken of as a #true
neuroma#; when ganglionic cells are present in addition to nerve fibres,
the name _ganglionic neuroma_ is applied. These tumours are rare, and
are chiefly met with in the main cords or abdominal plexuses of the
sympathetic system of children or young adults. They are quite
show signs of malignancy.
overgrowth may result in the formation of a circumscribed tumour, or may
take the form of a diffuse fibromatosis.
which is otherwise healthy, and it may be innocent or malignant.
encapsulated. It may become cystic as a result of haemorrhage or of
myxomatous degeneration. It grows very slowly, is usually elliptical in
shape, and the solid form is rarely larger than a hazel-nut. The nerve
fibres may be spread out all round the tumour, or may run only on one
cutaneous nerves, it is known as a _painful subcutaneous nodule_ or
_tubercle_. It is chiefly met with about the ankle, and most often in
When related to a deeper, named nerve-trunk, it is known as a
nerve roots where they pass through bony canals.
A trunk-neuroma is recognised clinically by its position in the line of
nerve but not in its long axis, and by being unduly painful and
[Illustration: FIG. 85.--Amputation Stump of Upper Arm, showing bulbous
thickening of the ends of the nerves, embedded in scar tissue at the
apex of the stamp.]
_Treatment._--If the tumour causes suffering it should be removed,
preferably by shelling it out from the investing nerve sheath or
of the tumour in a malignant form.
_The malignant neuroma_ is a sarcoma growing from the sheath of a nerve.
It has the same characters and clinical features as the innocent
variety, only it grows more rapidly, and by destroying the nerve fibres
causes motor symptoms--jerkings followed by paralysis. The sarcoma tends
sciatic and other large nerves of the limbs.
The _treatment_ is conducted on the same lines as sarcoma in other
situations; the insertion of a tube of radium after removal of the
tumour diminishes the tendency to recurrence; a portion of the
nerve-trunk being sacrificed, means must be taken to bridge the gap. In
inoperable cases it may be possible to relieve pain by excising a
by resecting the posterior nerve roots and their ganglia within the
vertebral canal.
The so-called _amputation neuroma_ has already been referred to (p. 344).
as "multiple neuromata," as well as certain other overgrowths related to
nerves. The essential lesion is an overgrowth of the endoneural
connective tissue throughout the nerves of both the cerebro-spinal and
sympathetic systems. The nerves are diffusely and unequally thickened,
overgrowth is exaggerated so as to form tumour-like swellings similar to
the trunk-neuroma already described. The tumours, which vary greatly in
size and number--as many as a thousand have been counted in one
case--are enclosed in a capsule derived from the perineurium. The
sympathetic nerves and ganglia, as well as the continuations of the
motor nerves within the muscles. The nerve fibres, although mechanically
displaced and dissociated by the overgrown endoneurium, undergo no
structural change except when compressed in passing through a bony
The disease probably originates before birth, although it may not make
its appearance till adolescence or even till adult life. It is sometimes
sometimes by palpable enlargement of the superficial nerve-trunks
(Fig. 86). The tumours resemble the solitary trunk-neuroma, are usually
quite insensitive, and many of them are unknown to the patient. As a
result of injury or other exciting cause, however, one or other tumour
agonising; it is increased by handling, and interferes with sleep. In
these conditions, a malignant transformation of the fibroma into sarcoma
case of tumours within the vertebral canal, which press on the spinal
medulla and cause paraplegia.
[Illustration: FIG. 86.--Diffuse enlargement of Nerves in generalised
Neuro-fibromatosis.
(After R. W. Smith.)]
skin_ in the form of brown spots or patches scattered over the trunk.
The disease is often stationary for long periods. In progressive cases
affection, particularly phthisis. The treatment is restricted to
relieving symptoms and complications; removal of one of the tumours is
to be strongly deprecated.
In a considerable proportion of cases one of the multiple tumours takes
on the characters of a malignant growth ("secondary malignant neuroma,"
Garre). This malignant transformation may follow upon injury, or on an
and muscular cramps, followed by paralysis from destruction of the
nerve fibres. The removal of the tumour is usually followed by
recurrence, so that high amputation is the only treatment to be
[Illustration: FIG. 87.--Plexiform Neuroma of small Sciatic Nerve, from
a girl aet. 16.
(Mr. Annandale's case.)]
distribution of one or more contiguous nerves or of a plexus of nerves,
are those of an ill-defined swelling composed of a number of tortuous,
appears in the early years of life, sometimes in relation to a pigmented
or hairy mole. It is of slow growth, may remain stationary for long
the distribution of the trigeminal or superficial cervical nerves. There
is no necessity for its removal, but this may be indicated because of
disfigurement, especially on the face or scalp or because its bulk
interferes with function. When involving the ophthalmic division of the
trigeminus, for example, it may cause enlargement of the upper lid and
excision are usually satisfactory, even if the removal is not complete.
[Illustration: FIG. 88.--Multiple Neuro-fibromas of Skin (Molluscum
Recklinghausen to be a soft fibroma related to the terminal filaments of
one of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 88). The disease appears in the form
of multiple, soft, projecting tumours, scattered all over the body,
except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. The tumours are of
all sizes, some being no larger than a pin's head, whilst many are as
big as a filbert and a few even larger. Many are sessile and others are
soft to the touch, and of the consistence of firm fat. In exceptional
cases one of the skin tumours may attain an enormous size and cause a
hideous deformity, hanging down by its own weight in lobulated or folded
pigmentation of the skin and with multiple tumours of the nerve-trunks.
[Illustration: FIG. 89.--Elephantiasis Neuromatosa in a woman aet. 28]
life without apparent cause, and it may be associated with multiple
[6] We desire here to acknowledge our indebtedness to Mr. James
#The Brachial Plexus.#--Lesions of the brachial plexus may be divided
In the #supra-clavicular injuries#, the violence applied to the head or
shoulder causes over-stretching of the anterior branches (primary
being those most liable to suffer. Sometimes the traction is exerted
upon the plexus from below, as when a man in falling from a height
complete severance of nerve fibres may occur and these give way at
different levels. During the healing process an excess of fibrous tissue
especially of the fifth, or fifth and sixth, anterior branches.
A _cervical rib_ may damage the plexus by direct pressure, the part
usually affected being the medial cord, which is made up of fibres from
the nerve injury is due, not to pressure on or laceration of the nerves
by fragments of bone, but to the violence causing the fracture, and this
Penetrating _wounds_, apart from those met with in military practice,
are rare.
attempts made to reduce the dislocation by the heel-in-the-axilla
method, or from fracture of the upper end of the humerus or of the neck
_Clinical Features._--Three types of lesion result from indirect
violence: the whole plexus; the upper-arm type; and the lower-arm type.
_When the whole plexus is involved_, sensibility is lost over the entire
and, as a rule, also the pectorals and spinati, but the rhomboids and
to the eye and orbit, with narrowing of the palpebral fissure, recession
of the globe, and the pupil is slow to dilate when shaded from the
light.
met with, and it is due to a lesion of the fifth anterior branch, or, it
may be, also of the sixth. The position of the upper limb is typical:
the arm and forearm hang close to the side, with the forearm extended
and pronated; the deltoid, spinati, biceps, brachialis, and supinators
the pronator teres are also affected. The patient is unable to supinate
the forearm or to abduct the arm, and in most cases to flex the forearm.
fully pronated, the extensors of the wrist becoming feeble flexors of
may be made of tickling and of pins-and-needles over the lateral aspect
of the arm. The abnormal position of the limb may persist although the
muscles regain the power of voluntary movement, and as the condition
frequently follows a fall on the shoulder, great care is necessary in
diagnosis, as the condition is apt to be attributed to an injury to the
The _lower-arm type_ of paralysis, associated with the name of Klumpke,
the anterior branch of the first dorsal nerve. In typical cases all the
_Infra-clavicular injuries_, as already stated, are most often produced
most frequently injured, and the muscles paralysed are those supplied by
the ulnar nerve, with, in addition, those intrinsic muscles of the hand
of the forearm and ulnar area of the hand. Injury of the lateral and
posterior cords is very rare.
_Treatment_ is carried out on the lines already laid down for nerve
injuries in general. It is impossible to diagnose between complete and
to allow of the establishment of the reaction of degeneration. If this
that employed for the subclavian artery, and the nerves are sought for
The usual after-treatment must be persisted in until recovery ensues,
over-stretched. The prognosis is less favourable in the supra-clavicular
lesions than in those below the clavicle, which nearly always recover
In the _brachial birth-paralysis_ met with in infants, the lesion is due
supra-clavicular region, the child crying when this part is touched or
the arm is moved. The attitude may be that of the Erb-Duchenne type, or
hangs powerless. A considerable proportion of the cases recover
relaxed, and, as soon as tenderness has disappeared, daily massage and
passive movements are employed. The reaction of degeneration can rarely
is present, an operation should be performed. After operation, the
shoulder should be elevated so that no traction is exerted on the
#The long thoracic nerve# (nerve of Bell), which supplies the serratus
anterior, is rarely injured. In those whose occupation entails carrying
weights upon the shoulder it may be contused, and the resulting
lower part of the trapezius, the branches from the third and fourth
cervical nerves which supply this muscle also being exposed to pressure
above the clavicle, and winging of the scapula; the patient is unable to
perform any forward pushing movements; on attempting either of these the
winging of the scapula is at once increased. If the scapula is compared
angle being more prominent, the spine is more horizontal and the lower
angle nearer the middle line. The majority of these cases recover if the
limb is placed at absolute rest, the elbow supported, and massage and
portion of the pectoralis major may be transplanted to the lower angle
of the scapula.
The long thoracic nerve may be cut across while clearing out the axilla
ends of the nerve being sutured, or the distal end grafted into the
#The Axillary (Circumflex) Nerve.#--In the majority of cases in which
due to a lesion of the fifth cervical nerve, as has already been
from the pressure of a crutch, or of the head of the humerus in
sub-glenoid dislocation, or in fracture of the neck of the scapula or of
the humerus. In miners, who work for long periods lying on the side, the
muscle may be paralysed by direct pressure on the terminal filaments of
the nerve, and the nerve may also be involved as a result of disease in
the sub-deltoid bursa.
The deltoid is wasted, and the acromion unduly prominent. In recent
standing it is not so simple, because other muscles, the spinati, the
clavicular fibres of the pectoral and the serratus, take its place and
elevate the arm; there is always loss of sensation on the lateral aspect
of the shoulder. There is rarely any call for operative treatment, as
the paralysis is usually compensated for by other muscles.
the scapula is unduly prominent, and there is impairment in the power of
abducting the arm and rotating it laterally.
The _musculo-cutaneous nerve_ is very rarely injured; when cut across,
there is paralysis of the coraco-brachialis, biceps, and part of the
brachialis supplied by the radial nerve. Supination is feebly performed
by the supinator muscle. Protopathic and epicritic sensibility are lost
trunk is more exposed to injury than any other nerve in the body. It is
resting on the back of a chair, especially in the deep sleep of
alcoholic intoxication (drunkard's palsy). It may be pressed upon by a
crutch in the axilla, by the dislocated head of the humerus, or by
associated with fractures of the humerus, especially those from direct
period may be compressed by callus.
tell whether the nerve is torn across or merely compressed. The patient
cutaneous branch, or when the dorsal branch of the musculo-cutaneous
of the hand.
"drop-wrist"; the wrist is flexed and pronated, and the patient is
unable to dorsiflex the wrist or fingers (Fig. 90). If the hand and
that are paralysed, so that the grasp of the hand is feeble, and the
patient almost loses the use of it; in some cases this would appear to
[Illustration: FIG. 90.--Drop-wrist following Fracture of Shaft of
Humerus.]
_Treatment._--The slighter forms of injury by compression recover under
forearm are placed on a palmar splint, with the hand dorsiflexed to
In the more severe injuries associated with fracture of the humerus and
attended with the reaction of degeneration, it is necessary to cut down
upon the nerve and free it from the pressure of a fragment of bone or
from callus or adhesions. If the nerve is torn across, the ends must be
nerve, or the ends may be implanted into the median.
Finally, in cases in which the paralysis is permanent and incurable, the
disability may be relieved by operation. A fascial graft can be employed
the third and fourth metacarpal bones distally and to the radius or ulna
when the tendon passes through muscle than through interosseous
membrane. The palmaris longus is anastomosed with the abductor pollicis
of abduction of the thumb. The flexor carpi ulnaris may also be
the wrist may be shortened, so as to place the hand in the position of
dorsal flexion, and thus improve the attitude and grasp of the hand.
branch_ (posterior interosseous), apart from suffering in lesions of the
radial, are liable to be contused or torn is dislocation of the head of
the radius, and in fracture of the neck of the bone. The deep branch may
fractures and dislocations in the region of the elbow. Division of the
superficial branch in the upper two-thirds of the forearm produces no
loss of sensibility; division in the lower third after the nerve has
become associated with branches from the musculo-cutaneous is followed
nerve is divided as well, and some of the fibres of the lower lateral
cutaneous branch of the radial.
line.
(After Head and Sherren.)]
#The Median Nerve# is most frequently injured in wounds made by broken
glass in the region of the wrist. It may also be injured in fractures of
there is impairment of mobility which affects the thumb, and to a less
extent the index finger: the terminal phalanx of the thumb cannot be
and is completed by the weight of the hand. After _division at the
wrist_, the abductor-opponens group of muscles and the two lateral
lumbricals only are affected; the abduction of the thumb can be feebly
imitated by the short extensor and the long abductor (ext. ossis
metacarpi pollicis), while opposition may be simulated by contraction of
the long flexor and the short abductor of the thumb; the paralysis of
supplied by the nerve; the injury, therefore, is liable to be over
looked. If, however, the tendons are divided as well as the nerve, there
is insensibility to deep touch. The areas of epicritic and of
protopathic insensibility are illustrated in Fig. 91. The division of
extent of the loss of epicritic or protopathic sensibility, but usually
affects deep sensibility.
[Illustration: FIG. 92.--To illustrate Loss of Sensation produced by
complete Division of Ulnar Nerve. Loss of all forms of cutaneous
light touch and to intermediate degrees of heat and cold are enclosed
#The Ulnar Nerve.#--The most common injury of this nerve is its division
in transverse accidental wounds just above the wrist. In the arm it may
be contused, along with the radial, in crutch paralysis; in the region
flexor carpi ulnaris, the ulnar half of the flexor digitorum profundus,
paralysis of the interosseous muscles attached to them; the little and
ring fingers are hyper-extended at these joints in consequence of the
paralysis of the lumbricals; all the fingers are flexed at the
ring fingers--claw-hand or _main en griffe_. On flexing the wrist, the
slips of the flexor sublimis attached to them and supplied by the median
impossible. Adduction and abduction movements of the fingers are lost.
Adduction of the thumb is carried out, not by the paralysed adductor
pollicis, but the movement may be simulated by the long flexor and
extensor muscles of the thumb. Epicritic sensibility is lost over the
longitudinally through the ring finger and continued upwards.
Protopathic sensibility is lost over an area which varies in different
cases. Deep sensibility is usually lost over an area almost as extensive
When the nerve is _divided at the wrist_, the adjacent tendons are also
and typical _main en griffe_ ensue. The loss of sensibility after
that after division at the elbow, except that in uncomplicated cases
deep sensibility is usually retained. If the tendons are divided as
must be worn, at least during the night, until the muscles regain their
#Dislocation of the ulnar nerve# at the elbow results from sudden and
laceration of the fascia that holds the nerve in its groove; it is
the condyle. It may retain this position, or it may slip backwards and
forwards with the movements of the arm. The symptoms at the time of the
The dislocated nerve is easily replaced, but is difficult to retain in
position. In recent cases the arm may be placed in the extended position
with a pad over the condyle, care being taken to avoid pressure on the
edges of the fascia over the nerve. This operation has been successful
in all the recorded cases.
#The Sciatic Nerve.#--When this nerve is compressed, as by sitting on a
as "sleeping" of the limb, but these phenomena are evanescent. _Injuries
more common than complete, and it is noteworthy that the fibres destined
the muscles of the leg are paralysed; if the section is in the upper
first quite powerless, but the patient usually recovers sufficiently to
be able to walk with a little support, and although the hamstrings are
paralysed the knee can be flexed by the sartorius and gracilis. The
chief feature is drop-foot. There is also loss of sensation below the
side of the leg and foot. Sensibility to deep touch is only lost over a
comparatively small area on the dorsum of the foot.
#The Common Peroneal (external popliteal) nerve# is exposed to injury
where it winds round the neck of the fibula, because it is superficial
tourniquet, or it may be bruised or torn in fractures of the upper end
tenotomy of the biceps tendon. Cases have been observed of paralysis of
occupations.
ground, so that in walking he is obliged to jerk the foot forwards and
laterally. The loss of sensibility depends upon whether the nerve is
comes off just before it passes round the neck of the fibula. In course
of time the foot becomes inverted and the toes are pointed--pes
equino-varus--and trophic sores are liable to form.
#The Tibial (internal popliteal) nerve# is rarely injured.
(Vol. II.).
should not be applied to pain which results from pressure on a nerve by
a tumour, a mass of callus, an aneurysm, or by any similar gross lesion.
We shall only consider here those forms of neuralgia which are amenable
#Brachial Neuralgia.#--The pain is definitely located in the
pressure as the cause of the pain by a cervical rib, a tumour, or an
aneurysm. When medical treatment fails, the nerve-trunks may be injected
with saline solution or recourse may be had to operative measures, the
affected cords being exposed and stretched through an incision in the
posterior triangle of the neck. If this fails to give relief, the more
serious operation of resecting the posterior roots of the affected
nerves within the vertebral canal may be considered.
_Neuralgia of the sciatic nerve_--#sciatica#--is the most common form of
suffer from indigestion, constipation, and oxaluria--in fact, the same
type of patients who are liable to lumbago, and the two affections are
coal-miners and others who assume a squatting position at work. The
onset of the pain may follow over-exertion and exposure to cold and wet,
especially in those who do not take regular exercise. Any error of diet
or indulgence in beer or wine may contribute to its development.
The essential symptom is paroxysmal or continuous pain along the course
slight, or it may be so severe as to prevent sleep. It is aggravated by
movement, so that the patient walks lame or is obliged to lie up. It is
aggravated also by any movement which tends to put the nerve on the
stretch, as in bending down to put on the shoes, such movements also
causing tingling down the nerve, and sometimes numbness in the foot.
This may be demonstrated by flexing the thigh on the abdomen, the knee
being kept extended; there is no pain if the same manoeuvre is repeated
with the knee flexed. The nerve is sensitive to pressure, the most
tender points being its emergence from the greater sciatic foramen, the
common peroneal nerve winds round the neck of the fibula. The muscles of
the thigh are often wasted and are liable to twitch.
filaments in the sheath of the nerve, and there may be patches of
cutaneous anaesthesia, loss of tendon reflexes, localised wasting of
muscles, and vaso-motor and trophic changes. The presence of the
_Diagnosis._--Pain referred along the course of the sciatic nerve on one
side, or, as is sometimes the case, on both sides, is a symptom of
tumours of the uterus, the rectum, or the pelvic bones. It may result
also from the pressure of an abscess or an aneurysm either inside the
pelvis or in the buttock, and is sometimes associated with disease of
the spinal medulla, such as tabes. Gluteal fibrositis may be mistaken
arthritis deformans, before arriving at a diagnosis of sciatica. A
digital examination of the rectum or vagina is of great value in
excluding intra-pelvic tumours.
_Treatment_ is both general and local. Any constitutional tendency, such
as gout or rheumatism, must be counteracted, and indigestion, oxaluria,
and constipation should receive appropriate treatment. In acute cases
thermogene wool, and the knee is flexed over a pillow; in some cases
in a Salter's cradle. A rubber hot-bottle may be applied over the seat
of greatest pain. The bowels should be well opened by castor oil or by
calomel followed by a saline. Salicylate of soda in full doses, or
very intense it may call for injections of heroin or morphin. Potassium
Relief usually results from bathing, douching, and massage, and from
passive movements of the limb--the hip being flexed while the knee is
kept extended; and by active movements--the patient flexing the limb at
morning, and should be practised systematically by those who are liable
to sciatica.
tissues surrounding it, of normal saline solution; from 70-100 c.c. are
injected at one time. If the pain recurs, the injection may require to
the buttock and thigh with long steel needles. Six or eight needles are
In obstinate and severe cases the nerve may be _forcibly stretched_.
hip flexed to a right angle, and then gradually extending the knee until
it is in a straight line with the thigh (Billroth). A general anaesthetic
is usually required. A more effectual method is to expose the nerve
through an incision at the fold of the buttock, and forcibly pull upon
being involved in adhesions.
#Trigeminal Neuralgia.#--A severe form of epileptiform neuralgia occurs
in the branches of the fifth nerve, and is one of the most painful
unilateral, and develops without apparent cause. The pain, which occurs
in paroxysms, is at first of moderate severity, but gradually becomes
but later they recur with such frequency as to be almost continuous.
They are usually excited by some trivial cause, such as moving the jaws
in eating or speaking, touching the face as in washing, or exposure to a
pain, but is in constant terror of its return, and the face wears an
expression of extreme suffering and anxiety. When the paroxysm is
accompanied by twitching of the facial muscles, it is called _spasmodic
tic_.
The skin of the affected area may be glazed and red, or may be pale and
There is excessive tenderness at the points of emergence of the
points may excite a paroxysm. In typical cases the patient is unable to
take any active part in life. The attempt to eat is attended with such
severe pain that he avoids taking food. In some cases the suffering is
and he is often on the verge of suicide.
It is important, however, to exclude the hysterical form of neuralgia,
which is characterised by its occurrence earlier in life, by the pain
varying in situation, being frequently bilateral, and being more often
constant than paroxysmal.
with them; if the nerve has been properly struck the injection is
relief may last for from six months to three years; if the pain returns,
per cent., and the amount injected about 2 c.c.; a general, or
(Schlosser); the needle is 8 cm. long, and 0.7 mm. in diameter. The
severe pain which the alcohol causes may be lessened, after the needle
has penetrated to the necessary depth, by passing a few cubic
centimetres of a 2 per cent. solution of _novocain-suprarenin_ through
relapses occur after the treatment with alcohol, renewed freedom from
pain may be obtained by its repetition. The ophthalmic division should
not, however, be treated in this manner, for the alcohol may escape into
nerve or nerves, either by resection--_neurectomy_; or by a combination
connections--_avulsion_. To prevent the regeneration of the nerve after
these operations, the canal of exit through the bone should be
individual branches, the _removal of the semilunar ganglion_, along with
the main trunks of the maxillary and mandibular divisions, should be
considered.
little or no disability from the unilateral paralysis of the muscles of
mastication; but on account of the insensitiveness of the cornea, the
or two after the operation; this may be done by fixing a large
watch-glass around the edge of the orbit with adhesive plaster.
If the ophthalmic branch is not involved, neither it nor the ganglion
should be interfered with; the maxillary and mandibular divisions should
be divided within the skull, and the foramen rotundum and foramen ovale
CHAPTER XVII
Structure of skin--_Blisters_--_Callosities_--_Corns_--_Chilblains_
    _Fibroma_; _Papilloma_; _Adenoma_; _Epithelioma_; _Rodent cancer_;
    _Melanotic cancer_; _Sarcoma_--AFFECTIONS OF CICATRICES--_Varieties
differentiated from without inwards into the stratum corneum, the
_true skin_ consists of connective tissue, in which ramify the blood
vessels, lymphatics, and nerves. That part of the corium immediately
adjoining the epidermis is known as the papillary portion, and contains
the terminal loops of the cutaneous blood vessels and the terminations
of the cutaneous nerves. The deeper portion of the true skin is known as
the reticular portion, and is largely composed of adipose tissue.
layer of the epidermis. The fluid may be clear, as in the blisters of a
recent burn, or blood-stained, as in the blisters commonly accompanying
fractures of the leg. It may become purulent as a result of infection,
The skin should be disinfected and the blisters punctured. When
allow of the necessary purification.
epidermis, where it has been exposed to prolonged friction and pressure.
bursa may form beneath a callosity, and if it becomes inflamed may cause
resembling a perforating ulcer of the foot.
The _treatment_ of callosities on the foot consists in removing pressure
by wearing properly fitting boots, and in applying a ring pad around the
callosity; another method is to fit a sock of spongiopilene with a hole
overgrown horny layer is pared away, and the part painted daily with a
[Illustration: FIG. 93.--Callosities and Corns on the Sole and Plantar
Aspect of the Toes in a woman who was also the subject of flat-foot.]
sensitive papillae of the corium. Corns are due to the friction and
pressure of ill-fitting boots, and are met with chiefly on the toes and
sole of the foot. A corn is usually hard, dry, and white; but it may be
sodden from moisture, as in "soft corns" between the toes. A bursa may
This is done after the manner of chiropodists by digging out the corn
with a suitably shaped knife. A more radical procedure is to excise,
the epidermis dies and can then be pared away. The unskilful paring of
#Chilblains.#--Chilblain or _erythema pernio_ is a vascular disturbance
children and anaemic girls. In the mild form there is a sensation of
itching are attended with pain, and the skin becomes of a violet or
wine-red colour. There is a third degree, closely approaching
frost-bite, in which the skin tends to blister and give way, leaving an
indolent raw surface popularly known as a "broken chilblain."
worn in cold weather, and sudden changes of temperature avoided. The
symptoms may be relieved by ichthyol ointment, glycerin and belladonna,
or a mixture of Venice turpentine, castor oil, and collodion applied on
lint which is wrapped round the toe. Another favourite application is
one of equal parts of tincture of capsicum and compound liniment of
resin ointment spread on gauze should be applied to broken chilblains.
occupation; in chronic cases this may be supplemented with hot-air
#Boils and Carbuncles.#--These result from infection with the
staphylococcus aureus, which enters the orifices of the ducts of the
skin under the influence of friction and pressure, as was demonstrated
by the well-known experiment of Garre, who produced a crop of pustules
and boils on his own forearm by rubbing in a culture of the
A #boil# results when the infection is located in a hair follicle or
so long as the skin retains its normal appearance, the term "blind
time breaks, giving exit to a drop or two of thick pus. After an
interval of from six to ten days a soft white slough is discharged; this
sebaceous gland. After the separation of the core the boil heals
Boils are most frequently met with on the back of the neck and the
buttocks, and on other parts where the skin is coarse and thick and is
exposed to friction and pressure. The occurrence of a number or a
succession of boils is due to spread of the infection, the cocci from
the original boil obtaining access to adjacent hair follicles. The
poultice or the wearing of infected underclothing.
While boils are frequently met with in debilitated persons, and
Boils may be differentiated from syphilitic lesions of the skin by
their acute onset and progress, and by the absence of other evidence of
syphilis; and from the malignant or anthrax pustule by the absence of
the central black eschar and of the circumstances which attend upon
anthrax infection.
iodine, and a Klapp's suction bell applied thrice daily. If pus forms,
further treatment consists in the use of diluted boracic or resin
ointment. In multiple boils on the trunk and limbs, lysol or boracic
baths are of service; the underclothing should be frequently changed,
and that which is discarded must be disinfected. In patients with
Any impaired condition of health should be corrected; when, there is
recourse should be had to vaccines. In refractory cases benefit has
#Carbuncle# may be looked upon as an aggregation of boils, and is
characterised by a densely hard base and a brownish-red discoloration of
continue to enlarge until it attains the size of a dinner-plate. The
patient is ill and feverish, and the pain may be so severe as to prevent
these burst there are formed a number of openings in the skin, giving it
a cribriform appearance; these openings exude pus. The different
exposed. The separation of the slough is a tedious process, and the
patient may become exhausted by pain, discharge, and toxin absorption.
When the slough is finally thrown off, a deep gap is left, which takes a
weakly person suffering from diabetes or chronic alcoholism; we have on
several occasions seen diabetic coma supervene and the patient die
without recovering consciousness. In the majority of cases the patient
shoulders. When it occurs on the face or anterior part of the neck it is
especially dangerous, because of the greater risk of dissemination of
the infection.
anthrax pustule.
woman aet. 57.]
these drugs are specially indicated when sugar is present in the urine.
Vaccines may be given a trial. The diet should be liberal and easily
the treatment is carried out on the same lines as for boils.
In some cases it is advisable to excise the carbuncle or to make
#Acute Abscesses of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue in Young
Children.#--In young infants, abscesses are not infrequently met with
infection of the sebaceous glands from dirty underclothing. The
abscesses should be opened, and the further spread of infection
prevented by cleansing of the skin and by the use of clean under-linen.
#Veldt Sore.#--This sore usually originates in an abrasion of the
pustule forms and bursts, and a brownish-yellow scab forms over it. When
These sores are most common about the hands, arms, neck, and feet, and
are most apt to occur in those who have had no opportunities of washing,
and who have lived for a long time on tinned foods.
#Tuberculosis of the Skin.#--Interest attaches chiefly to the primary
without--inoculation tubercle and lupus.
#Inoculation Tubercle.#--The appearances vary with the conditions under
the affection takes the form of an indolent painless swelling, the
epidermis being red and glazed, or warty, and irregularly fissured.
granulations. The infection rarely spreads to the lymphatics, but we
have seen inoculation tubercle of the index-finger followed by a large
cold abscess on the median side of the upper arm and by a huge mass of
breaking down glands in the axilla.
inoculated into wounds in the sole or about the toes, and although the
vessels, giving rise to abscesses and fungating ulcers in relation to
the femoral glands.
#Tuberculous Lupus.#--This is an extremely chronic affection of the
skin. It rarely extends to the lymph glands, and of all tuberculous
lesions is the least dangerous to life. The commonest form of
appearance is that of brownish-yellow or pink nodules in the skin, about
the size of hemp seed. Healing frequently occurs in the centre of the
affected area while the disease continues to extend at the margin.
"_lupus excedens_" or "_ulcerans_"--healing is attended with
cicatricial contraction, which may cause unsightly deformity. When the
diminished in size. When the nose is attacked, both the skin and mucous
surfaces are usually involved, and the nasal orifices may be narrowed or
tissue.
others. The patient complains of a burning sensation, but little of
characteristic of lupus than the appearance of fresh nodules in parts
raised, bright-red, papillary or villous surface. When the disease
On parts of the body other than the face, the disease is even more
fibrous tissue--the so-called _fibroid lupus_. Sometimes there is a
and toes it may lead to a progressive destruction of tissue like that
remarkable form of the disease is sometimes met with, to which the term
_lupus elephantiasis_ (Fig. 96) has been applied. It commences as an
ordinary lupus of the toes or dorsum of the foot, from which the
whole becomes enormously swollen and unshapely.
seat of epithelioma--_lupus epithelioma_--usually of the exuberant or
cauliflower type, which, like other epitheliomas that originate in scar
tissue, presents little tendency to infect the lymphatics.
The _diagnosis_ of lupus is founded on the chronic progress and long
disease. On the face it is most liable to be confused with syphilis and
period, and although presenting a superficial resemblance to
tuberculosis, its progress is more rapid, so that within a few months it
may involve an area of skin as wide as would be affected by lupus in as
many years. Further, it readily yields to anti-syphilitic treatment. In
cases of tertiary syphilis in which the nose is destroyed, it will be
destruction of tissue involves chiefly the soft parts.
Rodent cancer is liable to be mistaken for lupus, because it affects the
same parts of the face; it is equally chronic, and may partly heal. It
begins later in life, however, the margin of the ulcer is more sharply
defined, and often presents a "rolled" appearance.
_Treatment._--When the disease is confined to a limited area, the most
rapid and certain cure is obtained by _excision_; larger areas are
scraped with the sharp spoon. The _ray treatment_ includes the use of
Encouraging results have also been obtained by the application of carbon
#Multiple subcutaneous tuberculous nodules# are met with chiefly in
until they break down and form abscesses, which are usually about the
size of a cherry, and when these burst sinuses or ulcers result. If the
frequently mistaken for one or other of these affections. It occurs
and vegetable dealers, or florists. There is usually a history of trauma
subcutaneous tissue which, without pain or temperature, soften into
cold abscesses and leave indolent ulcers or sinuses. The infection is
#Elephantiasis.#--This term is applied to an excessive enlargement of a
part depending upon an overgrowth of the skin and subcutaneous cellular
or in combination. The condition is observed chiefly in the extremities
and in the external organs of generation.
_Elephantiasis from Lymphatic or Venous Obstruction._--Of this the
best-known example is _tropical elephantiasis_ (E. arabum), which is
endemic in Samoa, Barbadoes, and other places. It attacks the lower
extremity or the genitals in either sex (Figs. 97, 98). The disease is
become obliterated, and the skin and subcutaneous cellular tissue, being
streptococci--take on an overgrowth, which continues until the part
assumes gigantic proportions. In certain cases the lymph trunks have
country in which there are no filarial parasites in the lymph vessels,
The part affected is enormously increased in size, and causes
there is no pitting on pressure, and the swelling does not disappear on
abundant exudate of clear lymph. From neglect of cleanliness, the skin
silk threads--_lymphangioplasty_. By their capillary action they drain
circulation. It has been more successful in the face and upper limb than
a course of vaccines should precede the operation.
[Illustration: FIG. 97.--Elephantiasis in a woman aet. 45.]
varix and phlebitis with chronic ulcer; in the arm as a result of
extensive cancerous disease of the lymphatics in the axilla secondarily
young adult women, and from its following upon lupus of the toes or foot
it has been called _lupus elephantiasis_. The tuberculous infection
obliterated the skin and cellular tissues become hypertrophied, and the
surface is studded over with fungating tuberculous masses of a livid
blue colour. As the more severe forms of the disease may prove dangerous
to life by pyogenic complications inducing gangrene of the limb, the
[Illustration: FIG. 98.--Elephantiasis of Penis and Scrotum in native of
Demerara.
resulting from the circular constriction of a limb _in utero_ by
amniotic bands.
_Elephantiasis occurring apart from lymphatic or venous obstruction_ is
illustrated by _elephantiasis nervorum_, in which there is an overgrowth
of the skin and cellular tissue of an extremity in association with
neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 89); and by
nodules. It is also illustrated by _elephantiasis involving the scrotum_
as a result of prolonged irritation by the urine in cases in which the
penis has been amputated and the urine has infiltrated the scrotal
#Sebaceous Cysts.#--Atheromatous cysts or wens are formed in relation to
adults, on the scalp (Fig. 99), face, neck, back, and external genitals.
Sometimes they are multiple, and they may be met with in several members
in size from a split-pea to a Tangerine orange. In consistence they are
of the cyst can be squeezed through the opening. The wall of the cyst is
composed of a connective-tissue capsule lined by stratified squamous
fatty degeneration they break down into a greyish-yellow pultaceous and
semi-fluid material having a peculiar stale odour. It is probable that
stretched and closely adherent to the cyst wall as a result of friction
and pressure. The contents may ooze from the orifice of the duct and dry
on the skin surface, leading to the formation of a sebaceous horn
(Fig. 100). As a result of injury the cyst may undergo sudden
Recurrent attacks of inflammation frequently occur, especially in wens
the cyst, or an offensive fungating ulcer forms which may be mistaken
for epithelioma. True cancerous transformation is rare.
nearly always lie beneath the fascia, the skin is movable over them. A
fatty tumour is movable, and is often lobulated. The confusion with a
cold abscess is most likely to occur in wens of the neck or back, and it
differentiate between them.
ellipse of skin is removed along with the cyst. When inflamed, it may be
impossible to dissect out the cyst, and the wall should be destroyed
#Moles.#--The term mole is applied to a pigmented, and usually hairy,
patch of skin, present at or appearing shortly after birth. The colour
varies from brown to black, according to the amount of melanin pigment
present. The lesion consists in an overgrowth of epidermis which often
mere dots, others are as large as the palm of the hand, and occasionally
and occasionally become the starting-point of melanotic cancer. Rodent
cancer sometimes originates in the slightly pigmented moles met with on
the face. Overgrowths in relation to the cutaneous nerves, especially
the plexiform neuroma, occasionally originate in pigmented moles. Soldau
cutaneous nerves.
_Treatment._--The quickest way to get rid of a mole is to excise it; if
should be had to grafting. In large hairy moles of the face whose size
forbids excision, radium or the X-rays should be employed. Excellent
results have been obtained by refrigeration with solid carbon dioxide.
thirty seconds suffice. In persons with coarse skin an application of
one minute may be necessary, and it may have to be repeated.
#Horns.#--The _sebaceous_ horn results from the accumulation of the
dried contents of a wen on the surface of the skin: the sebaceous
material after drying up becomes cornified, and as fresh material is
horn grows from a warty papilloma of the skin. _Cicatrix_ horns are
formed by the heaping up of epidermis in the scars that result from
burns. _Nail_ horns are overgrown nails (keratomata of the nail bed),
If an ulcer forms at the base of a horn, it may prove the starting-point
of epithelioma, and for this reason, as well as for others, horns should
be removed.
(Dr. Kenneth Maclachan's case.)]
#New Growths in the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue.#--The _Angioma_ has
been described with diseases of blood vessels. _Fibroma._--Various types
it is usually solitary, and is easily removed with scissors. The
multiple, soft fibroma known as _molluscum fibrosum_, which depends upon
a neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves, is described with the
tumours of nerves. Hard fibromas occurring singly or in groups may be
malignancy, recurring after removal like the "recurrent fibroid" of
described with the affections of scars.
surface epidermis. It may be sessile or pedunculated hard or soft. The
on the hands, and are often multiple, occurring in clusters or in
among school-children, and show a remarkable tendency to disappear
growth of the epidermis is a frequent accompaniment of moles and of that
variety of lupus known as _lupus verrucosus_.
_Treatment._--In the multiple warts of children the health should be
braced up by a change to the seaside. A dusting-powder, consisting of
hands after washing and drying. The persistent warts of young adults
should be excised after freezing with chloride of ethyl. When cutting is
objected to, they may be painted night and morning with salicylic
application.
_Venereal warts_ occur on the genitals of either sex, and may form large
cauliflower-like masses on the inner surface of the prepuce or of the
syphilis, they occur independently of these diseases, being probably
acquired by contact with another individual suffering from warts
suffering, and when cleanliness is neglected there may be an offensive
in the male, the prepuce is removed and the warts on the glans are
if the parts are kept absolutely dry and clean. A useful dusting-powder
is one consisting of calamine and 5 per cent. salicylic acid; the
exsiccated sulphate of iron, in the form of a powder, may be employed in
cases which resist this treatment.
of the skin. One variety, known as the "tomato tumour," which apparently
tumours vary in size, and the skin, which is almost devoid of hairs, is
glistening and tightly stretched over them. A similar tumour may occur
on the nose. The _sebaceous adenoma_, which originates from the
restored Healing takes place with remarkable rapidity.
[Illustration: FIG. 101.--Paraffin Epithelioma.]
#Epithelioma# occurs in a variety of forms. When originating in a small
ulcer or wart-for example on the face in old people--it presents the
features of a chronic indurated ulcer. A more exuberant and rapidly
_crateriform ulcer_, commences on the face as a small red pimple which
rapidly develops into an elevated mass shaped like a bee-hive, and
breaks down in the centre. Epithelioma may develop anywhere on the body
in relation to long-standing ulcers, especially that resulting from a
epithelioma has been described by Neve of Kashmir. The natives in that
province are in the habit of carrying a fire-basket suspended from the
waist, which often burns the skin and causes a chronic ulcer, and many
of these ulcers become the seat of epithelioma, due, in Neve's opinion,
The term _trade epithelioma_ has been applied to that form met with in
chimney-sweeps. The most recent member of this group is the _X-ray
carcinoma_, which is met with in those who are constantly exposed to the
irritation of the X-rays; there is first a chronic dermatitis with warty
fissures and warts. The trade epithelioma varies a good deal in
Epithelial cancer has also been observed in those who have taken arsenic
over long periods for medicinal purposes.
sweat glands or sebaceous follicles, or in the foetal residues of
cutaneous glands. The cells are small and closely packed together in
flattened nodule in the skin, the epidermis over it being stretched and
shining. The centre becomes depressed, while the margins extend in the
form of an elevated ridge. Sooner or later the epidermis gives way in
the centre, exposing a smooth raw surface devoid of granulations.
[Illustration: FIG. 103.--Rodent Cancer of fifteen years' duration,
which has destroyed the contents of the Orbit.
(Sir Montagu Cotterill's case)]
the cancer that has not broken down. The central ulcer may temporarily
heal. There is itching but little pain, and the condition progresses
extremely slowly; rodent cancers which have existed for many years are
frequently met with. The disease attacks and destroys every structure
with which it comes in contact, such as the eyelids, the walls of the
hideous deformities (Fig. 103). The patient may succumb to haemorrhage or
to infective complications such as erysipelas or meningitis.
rare. We have only seen them once--in a case of rodent cancer in the
groin.
cancer. Lupus usually begins earlier in life, it presents apple-jelly
nodules, and lacks the rounded, elevated border. Syphilitic lesions
progress more rapidly, and also lack the characteristic margin. The
_Treatment._--In rodent cancers of limited size--say less than one inch
treatment. The alternative is the application of radium or of the
Rontgen rays, which, although requiring many exposures, results in cure
extensive area, or has invaded the cavity of the orbit or nose, radium
or X-rays yield the best results. The effect is soon shown by the
ingrowth of healthy epithelium from the surrounding skin, and at the
same time the discharge is lessened. Good results are also reported from
#Paget's disease# of the nipple is an epithelioma occurring in women
with at the umbilicus or on the genitals.
#Melanotic Cancer.#--Under this head are included all new growths which
pigmented mole which has been subjected to irritation. The primary
growth may remain so small that its presence is not even suspected, or
disease becomes disseminated along the lymphatics, the first evidence of
which is an enlargement of the lymph glands. As the primary growth is
the great toe, the femoral and inguinal glands become enlarged in
succession, forming tumours much larger than the primary growth.
forming a series of indurated pigmented cords and nodules (Fig. 104).
Lastly, the dissemination may be universal throughout the body, and this
deeply pigmented, being usually of a coal-black colour, and melanin
pigment may be present in the urine. When recurrence takes place in or
near the scar left by the operation, the cancer nodules are not
necessarily pigmented.
To extirpate the disease it is necessary to excise the tumour, with a
zone of healthy skin around it and a somewhat large zone of the
underlying subcutaneous tissue and deep fascia. Hogarth Pringle
the nearest anatomical group of glands should be removed with the tumour
in one continuous piece.
#Secondary Cancer of the Skin.#--Cancer may spread to the skin from a
subjacent growth by direct continuity or by way of the lymphatics. Both
of these processes are so well illustrated in cases of mammary cancer
excision, may recur as a fibro-sarcoma. The alveolar sarcoma commences
as a hard lump and increases in size until the epidermis gives way and
an ulcer is formed.
[Illustration: FIG. 105.--Melanotic Cancer of Forehead with Metastases
in Lymph Vessels and Glands.
(Mr. D. P. D. Wilkie's case.)]
Sometimes the primary growth appears in the form of multiple nodules
little avail, and in any case should be followed up by exposure to
radium.
AFFECTIONS OF CICATRICES
A cicatrix or scar consists of closely packed bundles of white fibres
absent. The size, shape, and level of the cicatrix depend upon the
A healthy scar, when recently formed, has a smooth, glossy surface of a
of the blood vessels concerned in its formation.
_Weak Scars._--A scar is said to be weak when it readily breaks down as
a result of irritation or pressure. The scars resulting from severe
burns and those over amputation stumps are especially liable to break
down from trivial causes. The treatment is to excise the weak portion of
the scar and bring the edges of the gap together.
parts, such as the eyelid or lip, or by fixing parts and preventing the
Depressed scars may be raised by the injection of paraffin into the
subcutaneous tissue.
_Painful Scars._--Pain in relation to a scar is usually due to nerve
_Pigmented or Discoloured Scars._--The best-known examples are the blue
coloration which results from coal-dust or gunpowder, the brown scars
variously coloured scars caused by tattooing. The only satisfactory
method of getting rid of the coloration is to excise the scar; the edges
are brought together by sutures, or the raw surface is covered with
skin-grafts according to the size of the gap.
_Hypertrophied Scars._--Scars occasionally broaden out and become
disappointment after operations such as those for goitre or tuberculous
glands in the neck. There is sometimes considerable improvement from
from the fact that this extension occurs in the form of radiating
processes, suggesting the claws of a crab. It is essentially a fibroma
or new growth of fibrous tissue, which commences in relation to the
walls of the smaller blood vessels; the bundles of fibrous tissue are
for the most part parallel with the surface, and the epidermis is
tightly stretched over them. It is more frequent in the negro and in
those who are, or have been, the subjects of tuberculous disease.
[Illustration: FIG. 106.--Recurrent Keloid in scar left by operation for
tuberculous glands in a girl aet. 7.]
Keloid may attack scars of any kind, such as those resulting from
operation or accidental wounds; and the scars resulting from burns,
especially when situated over the sternum, appear to be specially
irregular prolongations around its margins. The patient may complain of
itching and burning, and of great sensitiveness of the scar, even to
its returning in the new scar. The application of radium is, so far as
we know, the only means of preventing such return. The irritation
which result from burns sustained early in childhood and have never
outside the scar; the prognosis is therefore better than in epithelioma
ulcer or osteomyelitis, it may be better to amputate the limb.
AFFECTION OF THE NAILS
_Injuries._--When a nail is contused or crushed, blood is extravasated
beneath it, and the nail is usually shed, a new one growing in its
place. A splinter driven underneath the nail causes great pain, and if
organisms are carried in along with it, may give rise to infective
_Trophic Changes._--The growth of the nails may be interfered with in
any disturbance of the general health. In nerve lesions, such as a
divided nerve-trunk, the nails are apt to suffer, becoming curved,
already been referred to with whitlow. There is a superficial variety
resulting from the extension of a purulent blister beneath the nail
lifting it up from its bed, the pus being visible through the nail. The
removed. A deeper and more troublesome onychia results from infection at
reaches the matrix, and a drop or two of pus forms beneath the nail,
usually in the region of the lunule. This affection entails a
tried, and, failing improvement, the nail-fold and lunule should be
frozen, and a considerable portion removed with the knife; if only a
_Tuberculous onychia_ is met with in children and adolescents. It
and the nail is usually shed.
Phalanx of Great Toe, showing Ulceration of Skin and Displacement of
Nail.
_a._ Surface view.   _b._ On section.]
_Syphilitic_ affections of the nails assume various aspects. A primary
especially if it is attended with much pain. Other forms of onychia
overgrowth of the soft tissues along the edge of the nail. It is most
frequently met with in the great toe in young adults with flat-foot
their toe-nails carelessly or tear them with their fingers. Where the
soft tissues are pressed against the edge of the nail, the skin gives
way and there is the formation of exuberant granulations and of
may unfit the patient for work. In mild cases the condition may be
skin and nail; the nail is cut evenly, and the groove between it and the
and the redundant nail-fold.
_Subungual exostosis_ is an osteoma growing from the terminal phalanx of
the great toe (Fig. 107). It raises the nail and may be accompanied by
ulceration of the skin over the most prominent part of the growth. The
in the form of a flap, the base of the exostosis divided with the
chisel, and the exostosis removed.
_Malignant disease_ in relation to the nails is rare. Squamous
epithelioma and melanotic cancer are the forms met with. Treatment
consists in amputating the digit concerned, and in removing the
CHAPTER XVIII
INJURIES: _Contusion_; _Sprain_; _Rupture_--Hernia of
    muscle--Dislocation of tendons--Wounds--Avulsion of tendon.
    DISEASES OF MUSCLE AND OF TENDONS: _Atrophy_; _"Muscular
    rheumatism"_--_Fibrositis_; _Contracture_; _Myositis_;
    _Calcification and Ossification_; _Tumours_. DISEASES OF TENDON
    SHEATHS: _Teno-synovitis_.
INJURIES
#Contusion of Muscle.#--Contusion of muscle, which consists in bruising
displacement of bone in a fracture or dislocation.
complains of severe pain on attempting to use the muscle, and maintains
Restoration of function is usually complete; but when the nerve
supplying the muscle is bruised at the same time, as may occur in the
deltoid, wasting and loss of function may be persistent. In exceptional
cases the process of repair may be attended with the formation of bone
and a bandage; after an interval, massage and appropriate exercises are
#Sprain and Partial Rupture of Muscle.#--This lesion consists in
overstretching and partial rupture of the fibres of a muscle or its
aponeurosis. It is of common occurrence in athletes and in those who
follow laborious occupations. It may follow upon a single or repeated
effort--especially in those who are out of training. Familiar examples
of muscular sprain are the "labourer's" or "golfer's back," affecting
the latissimus dorsi or the sacrospinalis (erector spinae); the
muscles and ligaments about the elbow; the "angler's elbow," affecting
the common origin of the extensors and supinators; the "sprinter's
sprain," affecting the flexors of the hip; and the "jumper's and
dancer's sprain," affecting the muscles of the calf. The patient
was produced. The disability varies in different cases, and it may
incapacitate the patient from following his occupation or sport for
The _treatment_ consists in resting the muscle from the particular
it in other directions, in the use of massage, and the induction of
muscle has not been exercised, the patient shrinks from using it and the
adhesions have formed and that these interfere with the recovery of
function. The condition may be overcome by graduated movements or by a
fruitful field for the bone-setter.
#Rupture of Muscle or Tendon.#--A muscle or a tendon may be ruptured in
its continuity or torn from its attachment to bone. The site of rupture
in individual muscles is remarkably constant, and is usually at the
place through the belly of a muscle, the ends retract, the amount of
retraction depending on the length of the muscle, and the extent of its
the sartorius in the thigh, furnish examples of muscles in which the
separation between the ends may be considerable.
replaced by connective tissue, which forms a bond of union between the
fibrous tissue, but when the ends are in contact it contains a number of
newly formed muscle fibres. In the process of repair, one or both ends
structures, and if the distal portion of a muscle is deprived of its
nerve supply it may undergo degeneration and so have its function
often involuntary, movement. As examples may be cited the rupture of
the quadriceps extensor in attempting to regain the balance when falling
backwards; of the gastrocnemius, plantaris, or tendo-calcaneus in
when it swerves--"rider's sprain"; of the abdominal muscles in vomiting,
and of the biceps in sudden movements of the arm. Sometimes the effort
is one that would scarcely be thought likely to rupture a muscle, as in
sitting at table, ruptured his biceps in a sudden effort to catch a
much by the contraction of the muscle concerned, as by the contraction
undergoes rupture is completed. The violent muscular contractions of
epilepsy, tetanus, or delirium rarely cause rupture.
experiences a sudden pain, with the sensation of being struck with a
The limb becomes powerless. At the seat of rupture there is tenderness
and swelling, and there may be ecchymosis. As the swelling subsides, a
the muscle is thrown into contraction. If untreated, a hard, fibrous
_Treatment._--The ends are approximated by placing the limb in an
approximate the ends satisfactorily, the muscle or tendon is exposed by
and is most successful when it is done within five or six days of the
difficult by the retraction of the ends and by their adhesion to
_Rupture of the biceps of the arm_ may involve the long or the short
upper end of the humerus, the patient is unable to abduct or to elevate
the arm, and he may be unable to flex the elbow when the forearm is
supinated. The long axis of the muscle, instead of being parallel with
to contract the muscle, its belly is seen to be drawn towards the
elbow.
The _adductor longus_ may be ruptured, or torn from the pubes, by a
violent effort to adduct the limb. A swelling forms in the upper and
muscle is thrown into contraction.
The _quadriceps femoris_ is usually ruptured close to its insertion into
sometimes bilateral. The injured limb is rendered useless for
progression, as it suddenly gives way whenever the knee is flexed.
The _tendo calcaneus_ (Achillis) is comparatively easily ruptured, and
the symptoms are sometimes so slight that the nature of the injury may
be overlooked. The limb should be put up with the knee flexed and the
The _plantaris_ is not infrequently ruptured from trivial causes, such
as a sudden movement in boxing, tennis, or hockey. A sharp stinging pain
like the stroke of a whip is felt in the calf; there is marked
tenderness at the seat of rupture, and the patient is unable to raise
the heel without pain. The injury is of little importance, and if the
patient does not raise the heel from the ground in walking, it is
lay him up.
fascia covering a muscle becoming stretched or torn, the muscular
substance is protruded through the rent. It has been observed chiefly in
the adductor longus. An oval swelling forms in the upper part of the
thigh, is soft and prominent when the muscle is relaxed, less prominent
obturator hernia. Treatment is only called for when it is causing
herniated portion excised, and the rent in the sheath closed by sutures.
biceps.
violent twist of the foot. There is severe pain and considerable
swelling on the lateral aspect of the ankle; the peroneus longus by
grooves, and are retained there by a series of strips of plaster. At the
end of three weeks massage and exercises are employed.
In other cases there is no history of injury, but whenever the foot is
forwards out of its groove, sometimes with an audible snap. The patient
suffers pain and is disabled until the tendon is replaced. Reduction is
easy, but as the displacement tends to recur, an operation is required
to fix the tendon in its place. An incision is made over the tendon; if
it over the tendon.
The _long tendon of the biceps_ may be dislocated laterally--or more
frequently medially--as a result of violent or repeated rotation
movements of the arm, such as are performed in wringing clothes. The
dislocate the tendon at will, but the disability is so inconsiderable
that there is rarely any occasion for interference.
#Wounds of Muscles and Tendons.#--When a muscle is cut across in a
united by scar tissue and fixed to bone or other adjacent structure. In
a limb this interferes with the functions of the muscle; in the
abdominal wall the scar tissue may stretch, and so favour the
development of a ventral hernia.
Tendons may be cut across accidentally, especially in those wounds so
commonly met with above the wrist as a result, for example, of the hand
being thrust through a pane of glass. It is essential that the ends
should be sutured to each other, and as the proximal end is retracted
the original wound may require to be enlarged in an upward direction.
When primary suture has been omitted, or has failed in consequence of
suppuration, the separated ends of the tendon become adherent to
impaired or lost. Under these conditions the operation of secondary
suture is indicated.
tendon; if the interval is too wide to admit of their being approximated
other part may be inserted in the gap. A new sheath may be provided for
the tendon by resecting a portion of the great saphenous vein.
_Injuries of the tendons of the fingers_ are comparatively common. One
of the extensor tendon close to its insertion into the terminal
slight violence, such as striking the tip of the extended finger against
an object, or the violence may be more severe, as in attempting to catch
a cricket ball or in falling. The terminal phalanx is flexed towards the
neglected cases, a perfect functional result can only be obtained by
passage of the sutures.
_Subcutaneous rupture_ of one or other _of the digital tendons_ in the
has elapsed since the accident, the proximal end may be so retracted
which case a slip may be taken from an adjacent tendon; in the case of
one of the extensors of the thumb, the extensor carpi radialis longus
may be detached from its insertion and stitched to the distal end of the
Subcutaneous _rupture of the tendon of the extensor pollicis longus_ at
the wrist takes place just after its emergence from beneath the annular
ligament; the actual rupture may occur painlessly, more frequently a
sharp pain is felt over the back of the wrist. The prominence of the
[Illustration: FIG. 108.--Avulsion of Tendon with Terminal Phalanx of
(Surgical Museum, University of Edinburgh.)]
_Avulsion of Tendons._--This is a rare injury, in which the tendons of a
finger or toe are torn from their attachments along with a portion of
that is separated, and with it the tendon of the deep flexor, which
and trimming the mutilated finger so as to provide a useful stump.
_Congenital absence_ of muscles is sometimes met with, usually in
may be absent on one or on both sides, without, however, causing any
disability, as other muscles enlarge and take on its functions.
is commonly met with as a result of disuse, as when a patient is
In cases of joint disease, the muscles acting on the joint become
atrophied more rapidly than is accounted for by disuse alone, and this
is attributed to an interference with the trophic innervation of the
in the extensor than in the flexor groups of muscles. Those affected
their excitability to the faradic current is diminished.
It is most pronounced in lesions of the motor nerve-trunks, probably
because vaso-motor and trophic fibres are involved as well as those that
are purely motor in function. It is attended with definite structural
alterations, the muscle elements first undergoing fatty degeneration,
and then being absorbed, and replaced to a large extent by ordinary
connective tissue and fat. At a certain stage the muscles exhibit the
by fat, while at the same time there is a regeneration of muscle fibres.
#Fibrositis# or "#Muscular Rheumatism#."--This clinical term is applied
have this in common, that sudden and severe pain is excited by movement
the connective tissue; the new tissue differs from normal fibrous tissue
pressure, and in the fact that it can be massaged away (Stockman). It
would appear to involve mainly the fibrous tissue of muscles, although
1904.
In _lumbago_--_lumbo-sacral fibrositis_--the pain is usually located
over the sacrum, the sacro-iliac joint, or the aponeurosis of the lumbar
muscles on one or both sides. The amount of tenderness varies, and so
long as the patient is still he is free from pain. The slightest
be so severe as to render him helpless for the moment. The pain is most
down the back of the hip, especially if, as is commonly the case,
lumbago, it is liable to recur, and an attack may be determined by
errors of diet, changes of weather, exposure to cold or unwonted
exertion. It is met with chiefly in male adults, and is most apt to
_Gluteal fibrositis_ usually follows exposure to wet, and affects the
is aggravated by such movements as bring the affected muscles into
nerve and cause genuine sciatic neuralgia (Llewellyn and Jones). A
similar condition may implicate the fascia lata of the thigh, or the
calf muscles and their aponeuroses--_crural fibrositis_.
In _painful stiff-neck_, or "rheumatic torticollis," the pain is located
in one side of the neck, and is excited by some inadvertent movement.
contracting the sterno-mastoid. There may be tenderness over the
vertebral spines or in the lines of the cervical nerves, and the
with in children.
the intercostal nerves, and is excited by movement of the chest, as in
coughing, or by any bodily exertion. There is often marked tenderness.
A similar affection is met with in the _shoulder and arm_--_brachial
fibrositis_--especially on waking from sleep. There is acute pain on
attempting to abduct the arm, and there may be localised tenderness in
the region of the axillary nerve.
attention to the stomach, bowels, and kidneys and with the correction
of any gouty tendencies that may be present. Remedies such as
salicylates are given for the relief of pain, and for this purpose drugs
of the aspirin type are to be preferred, and these may be followed by
the patient must take systematic exercises of all kinds, especially such
as bring out the movements of the vertebral column and hip-joints.
wrist is flexed to a right angle it is possible to extend the fingers.
(Photographs lent by Mr. Lawford Knaggs)]
#Contracture of Muscles.#--Permanent shortening of muscles results from
the prolonged approximation of their points of attachment, or from
structural changes in their substance produced by injury or by disease.
It is a frequent accompaniment and sometimes a cause of deformities, in
tendons may be an essential step.
#Myositis.#--_Ischaemic Myositis._--Volkmann was the first to describe a
form of myositis followed by contracture, resulting from interference
with the arterial blood supply. It is most frequently observed in the
treatment for fractures in the region of the elbow, the splints and
bandages causing compression of the blood vessels. There is considerable
nerves are compressed; this is further increased if the elbow is flexed
and splints and tight bandages are applied. The muscles acquire a
usually the first sign of the malady; in time the muscles undergo
hand. The affected muscles usually show the reaction of degeneration. In
severe cases the median and ulnar nerves are also the seat of
By means of splints, the interphalangeal, metacarpo-phalangeal, and
wrist joints should be gradually extended until the deformity is
over-corrected (R. Jones). Murphy advises resection of the radius and
Various forms of _pyogenic_ infection are met with in muscle, most
degeneration of its fibres, or in suppuration and the formation of one
or more abscesses in the muscle substance. Repair may be associated with
contracture.
but rarely goes on to suppuration.
In the early secondary period of _syphilis_, the muscles may be the seat
of dull, aching, nocturnal pains, especially in the neck and back.
_Syphilitic contracture_ is a condition which has been observed chiefly
in the thigh are the muscles more commonly affected. The striking
feature is a gradually increasing difficulty of extending the limb at
the elbow or knee, and progressive flexion of the joint. The affected
muscle is larger and firmer than normal, and its electric excitability
readily yield to anti-syphilitic remedies.
_Tuberculous disease_ in muscle, while usually due to extension from
adjacent tissues, is sometimes the result of a primary infection through
the blood-stream. Tuberculous nodules are found disseminated throughout
the muscle; the surrounding tissues are indurated, and central caseation
may take place and lead to abscess formation and sinuses. We have
observed this form of tuberculous disease in the gastrocnemius and in
vertebrae.
#Tendinitis.#--German authors describe an inflammation of tendon as
distinguished from inflammation of its sheath, and give it the name
gouty and rheumatic subjects who have overstrained the tendon,
especially during cold and damp weather. There is localised pain which
is aggravated by walking, and the tendon is sensitive and swollen from a
strain.
fasciae, and ligaments, in those who are the subjects of arthritis
deformans, are seldom recognised clinically, but are frequently met with
with in Charcot's disease of joints, and in fractures which have
repaired with exuberant callus. The new bone may be in the form of
spicules, plates, or irregular masses, which, when connected with a
[Illustration: FIG. 110.--Ossification in Tendon of Ilio-psoas Muscle.]
repeated injury. Ossification in the crureus or vastus lateralis muscle
of new bone moves with the affected muscle, it causes little
inconvenience. If, as is commonly the case, it is fixed to the femur,
and difficulty in flexing the knee. A skiagram shows the extent of the
mass and its relationship to the femur. The treatment consists in
excising the bony mass.
Difficulty may arise in differentiating such a mass of bone from
sarcoma; the ossification in muscle is uniformly hard, while the sarcoma
muscle, whereas in sarcoma the involvement of the bone is shown by
indentations and irregularity in its contour.
the brachialis muscle as a sequel of dislocation of the elbow. After
reduction of the dislocation, the range of movement gradually diminishes
and a hard swelling appears in front of the lower end of the humerus.
The lump continues to increase in size and in three to four weeks the
disability becomes complete. A radiogram shows a shadow in the muscle,
attached at one part as a rule to the coronoid process. During the next
three or four months, the lump in front of the elbow remains stationary
in size; a gradual decrease then ensues, but the swelling persists, as a
[Illustration: FIG. 111.--Calcification and Ossification in Biceps and
Triceps.
(From a radiogram lent by Dr. C. A. Adair Dighton.)]
Ossification in the adductor longus was first described by Billroth
under the name of "rider's bone." It follows bruising and partial
rupture of the muscle, and has been observed chiefly in cavalry
operation.
disease, in which the muscles, tendons, and fasciae throughout the body
become the seat of ossification. It affects almost exclusively the male
sex, and usually begins in childhood or youth, sometimes after an
especially the trapezius and latissimus, are the first to be affected,
[Illustration: FIG. 112.--Ossification in Muscles of Trunk in a case of
(Photograph lent by Dr. Rustomjee.)]
The affected muscles show swellings which are rounded or oval, firm and
of the overlying skin. Skiagrams show that a considerable deposit of
lime salts may precede the formation of bone, as is seen in Fig. 111. In
forward, the hips are flexed, and abduction and other movements of the
the striped muscles of the body are replaced by bone, and all movements,
even those of the jaws, are abolished. The subjects of this disease
usually succumb to pulmonary tuberculosis.
There is no means of arresting the disease, and surgical treatment is
interferes with an important movement.
deformity of the great toe, which usually takes the form of hallux
valgus, the great toe coming to lie beneath the second one; the
shortening is usually ascribed to absence of the first phalanx, but it
proliferation of the intra-muscular connective tissue and a gradual
replacement and absorption of the muscle fibres. The bone is spongy in
character, and its development takes place along similar lines to those
observed in ossification from the periosteum.
framework and not from the muscle fibres. Innocent tumours, such as the
fibroma, lipoma, angioma, and neuro-fibroma, are rare. Malignant tumours
may be primary in the muscle, or may result from extension from adjacent
growths--for example, implication of the pectoral muscle in cancer of
the breast--or they may be derived from tumours situated elsewhere. The
diagnosis of an intra-muscular tumour is made by observing that the
swelling is situated beneath the deep fascia, that it becomes firm and
fixed when the muscle contracts, and that, when the muscle is relaxed,
it becomes softer, and can be moved in the transverse axis of the
muscle, but not in its long axis.
fibro-sarcoma--_the recurrent fibroid of Paget_--which is most
frequently met with in the muscles of the abdominal wall. A rarer
variety is the ossifying chondro-sarcoma, which undergoes ossification
to such an extent as to be visible in skiagrams.
transplanting an adjacent muscle in its place.
membranes of joints, and are liable to the same diseases. Apart from the
peritendinous and perimuscular cellular tissue which is subject to the
same pathological conditions as the tendon sheaths proper.
#Teno-synovitis.#--The toxic or infective agent is conveyed to the
and tuberculous varieties, or is introduced directly through a wound, as
in the common pyogenic form of teno-synovitis.
strain or over-use of the tendon, there would appear to be some other,
would be much more common than it is: only a small proportion of those
who strain or over-use their tendons become the subjects of
teno-synovitis. The opposed surfaces of the tendon and its sheath are
covered with fibrinous lymph, so that there is friction when they move
The _clinical features_ are pain on movement, tenderness on pressure
when the tendon is moved in its sheath. The crepitation may be soft like
of the tendon, and redness and oedema of the skin. If there is an
effusion of fluid into the sheath, the swelling is more marked and
crepitation is absent. There is little tendency to the formation of
In the upper extremity, the sheath of the long tendon of the biceps may
frequently met with in those who follow occupations which involve
prolonged use or excessive straining of these tendons--for example,
washerwomen or riveters. It also occurs as a result of excessive
cycling, walking, or dancing. There is pain in raising the heel from the
ground, and creaking can be felt on palpation.
The _treatment_ consists in putting the affected tendon at rest, and
fomentations, and ichthyol and glycerine. The affection readily subsides
commonly met with in gouty subjects. The accumulation of urates may
from a pea to a cherry, attached to the tendon and moving with it. They
may be merely unsightly, or they may interfere with the use of the
tendon. Recurrent attacks of inflammation are prone to occur. We have
removed such gouty masses with satisfactory results.
_Suppurative Teno-synovitis._--This form usually follows upon infected
a frequent sequel to whitlow; it may also follow amputation of a finger.
cellulitis. In moderately acute cases the tendon and its sheath become
covered with granulations, which subsequently lead to the formation of
adhesions; while in more acute cases the tendon sloughs. The pus may
is liable to spread to neighbouring sheaths or to adjacent bones or
joints--for example, those of the wrist.
The _treatment_ consists in inducing hyperaemia and making small
incisions for the escape of pus. The site of incision is determined by
the point of greatest tenderness on pressure. After the inflammation has
subsided, active and passive movements are employed to prevent the
formation of adhesions between the tendon and its sheath. If the tendon
extremely slow and is attended with prolonged suppuration.
_Gonorrhoeal Teno-synovitis._--This is met with especially in the tendon
sheaths about the wrist and ankle. It may occur in a mild form, with
the swelling partakes of the characters of a phlegmon with threatening
suppuration; it may result in crippling from adhesions. Even if pus
in inducing hyperaemia by Bier's method; and a vaccine may be employed
with satisfactory results.
movement of the tendon. The sheath itself is thickened by the growth of
tuberculous granulation tissue. The bodies are smooth and of a
dull-white colour, and vary greatly in size and shape. There may be an
overgrowth of the fatty fringes of the synovial sheath, a condition
described as "arborescent lipoma."
The _clinical features_ vary with the tendon sheath affected. In the
common flexor sheath of the hand an hour-glass-shaped swelling is
formed, bulging above and below the transverse carpal (anterior annular)
ligament--formerly known as _compound palmar ganglion_. There is little
or no pain, but the fingers tend to be stiff and weak, and to become
flexed. On palpation, it is usually possible to displace the contents of
fluctuation, and, what is more characteristic, a peculiar soft crepitant
sensation from the movement of the melon-seed bodies. In the sheath of
sausage-shaped, and is constricted opposite the annular ligament.
The onset and progress of the affection are most insidious, and the
thinned and gives way, resulting in the formation of a sinus.
becomes the seat of _a diffuse tuberculous thickening_, not unlike the
white swelling met with in joints, and with a similar tendency to
wrist and in the tendons at the ankle. The tuberculous granulation
tissue is liable to break down and lead to the formation of a cold
disease in an adjacent bone or joint. In the peronei tendons, for
incision of the overlying soft parts, the sheath is carefully isolated
from the surrounding tissues and is cut across above and below. Any
Associated bone or joint lesions are dealt with at the same time. In the
after-treatment the functions of the tendons must be preserved by
#Syphilitic Affections of Tendon Sheaths.#--These closely resemble the
sheath; gummata are met with during the tertiary period.
unattended by symptoms and disappearing under anti-syphilitic treatment.
_fibroma_, and _myxoma_, are rare. Special mention should be made of the
swelling of slow development, or over the phalanx of a finger as a small
rounded swelling. The tumour tissue, when exposed by dissection, is of a
the tendons, and this is usually successful in bringing about a
permanent cure.
CHAPTER XIX
Anatomy--Normal and adventitious bursae--Injuries: Bursal
    bursitis; Bursal hydrops; Solid bursal tumour; Gonorrhoeal and
    suppurative forms of bursitis; Tuberculous and syphilitic
    disease--Tumours--_Diseases of individual bursae in the upper and
    lower extremities_.
Some are normally present--for instance, that between the skin and the
patella, and that between the aponeurosis of the gluteus maximus and the
great trochanter. _Adventitious bursae_ are developed as a result of
club-foot.
haemorrhage may occur into the cavity of a bursa and give rise to a
_bursal haematoma_. Such a haematoma may mask a fracture of the bone
beneath--for example, fracture of the olecranon.
joints and tendon sheaths, and is liable to the same forms of disease.
#Infective bursitis# frequently follows abrasions, scratches, and wounds
of the skin over the prepatellar or olecranon bursa, and in neglected
a spreading cellulitis.
incident to particular occupations. The most familiar examples of these
are the enlargement of the prepatellar bursa met with in housemaids--the
"housemaid's knee" (Fig. 113); the enlargement of the olecranon
"tailor's bottom" (Fig. 116). These affections are characterised by an
toxic agent concerned, otherwise these affections would be much more
common than they are. Of the countless housemaids in whom the
proportion become the subjects of housemaid's knee.
_Clinical Features._--As these are best illustrated in the different
varieties of prepatellar bursitis, it is convenient to take this as the
type. In a number of cases the inflammation is acute and the patient is
unable to use the limb; the part is hot, swollen, and tender, and
fluctuation can be detected in the bursa. In the majority the condition
so that septa, bands, or fringes are formed, not unlike those met with
in arthritis deformans. These fringes may be detached and form loose
fibrinous bodies of the melon-seed type, sometimes moulded into circular
discs like wafers. The presence of irregular thickenings of the wall, or
of loose bodies, may be recognised on palpation, especially in
thickening of the wall may take place in a uniform and concentric
bursal tumour_--a small cavity remaining in the centre which serves to
distinguish it from a new growth or neoplasm.
[Illustration: FIG. 113.--Hydrops of Prepatellar Bursa in a housemaid.]
The _treatment_ varies according to the variety and stage of the
application of fomentations. Hydrops may be got rid of by blistering,
by tapping, or by incision and drainage. When the wall is thickened, the
most satisfactory treatment is to excise the bursa; the overlying skin
being reflected in the shape of a horse-shoe flap or being removed along
form, urate of soda is deposited in the wall of the bursa, and may
size (Fig. 114).
[Illustration: FIG. 114.--Section through Bursa over external malleolus,
showing deposit of urate of soda. (Cf. Fig. 117.)]
It may occur as an independent affection, or may be associated with
prepatellar and subdeltoid bursae, or in one of the bursae over the great
or without melon-seed bodies, or of uniform thickening of the wall of
abscess, and give rise to sinuses. The best treatment is to excise the
affected bursa, or, when this is impracticable, to lay it freely open,
remove the tuberculous tissue with the sharp spoon or knife, and treat
#Diseases of Individual Bursae.#--The _olecranon bursa_ is frequently
the seat of pyogenic infection and of traumatic or trade bursitis, the
latter being known as "miner's" or "student's elbow."
(From a photograph lent by Sir George T. Beatson.)]
is indispensable in abduction and rotation of the humerus. When the arm
the acromion, and the upper part or roof is rolled up in the same
the arm is abducted (Dawbarn's sign). It is liable to traumatic
affections from a fall on the shoulder, pressure, or over-use of the
constant symptom and is especially annoying at night, the patient being
unable to get into a comfortable position. Tenderness may be elicited
the great tuberosity, just external to the inter-tubercular (bicipital)
groove. When adhesions are present, abduction beyond 10 degrees is
the overlying tissues. If left to himself, the patient tends to maintain
and massage are persevered with. In neglected cases, when adhesions have
formed and the shoulder is fixed, it may be necessary to break down the
a large fluctuating swelling may form and acquire the characters of a
cold abscess (Fig. 115).
The bursa underneath the tendon of the _subscapularis_ muscle when
traumatic bursitis.
The bursa under the _tendon of insertion of the biceps_, when the seat
the combined movement of flexion and supination, slight limitation of
of the ischium_, when enlarged as a trade disease, is known as
"weaver's" or "tailor's bottom." It may form a fluctuating swelling of
trochanter.
The bursa _between the psoas muscle and the capsule of the hip-joint_
Cartilaginous and partly ossified loose bodies may accumulate in the
ilio-psoas bursa and distend it, both in a downward direction towards
fluid forms a horse-shoe swelling above the patella.
In front of the patella and its ligament is the _prepatellar bursa_,
which may have one, two, or three compartments, usually communicating
knee," which is very common and is sometimes bilateral, and, less
frequently, of tuberculous disease which usually originates in the
(Mr. Scot-Skirving's case.)]
The bursa _between the ligamentum patellae and the tibia_ is rarely the
seat of disease. When it is, there is pain and tenderness referred to
tuberosity of the tibia is apparently enlarged, and there is a
fluctuating swelling on either side of the ligament, most marked in the
simple hydrops, forming a fluctuating egg-or sausage-shaped swelling at
the medial side of the popliteal space. It is flaccid in the flexed, and
tense in the extended position. As a rule it causes little
inconvenience, and may be left alone. Otherwise it should be dissected
[Illustration: FIG. 117.--Gouty Disease of Bursae in a tailor. The bursal
in tailors, giving rise to the condition known as "tailor's ankle"
(Fig. 117).
the calcaneus_ may become inflamed--especially as a result of
post-scarlatinal rheumatism or gonorrhoea. The affection is known as
Achillo-bursitis. There is severe pain in the region of the insertion of
and the patient may be unable to walk. There is a tender swelling on
affection persists or relapses, it is best to excise the bursa. The
tendo-calcaneus is detached from the calcaneus, the bursa dissected out,
and the tendon replaced. If there is a bony projection from the
The bursa that is sometimes met with on the under aspect of the
and tenderness in the sole of the foot. This affection may be associated
with a spinous projection from the bone, which is capable of being
recognised in a skiagram. The soft parts of the heel are turned forwards
present, is removed.
metatarsal in hallux valgus; over the tarsus, metatarsus, and digits in
disease of the spine; over the end of the bone in amputation stumps, and
over hard tumours such as chondroma and osteoma, are described
elsewhere.
DISEASES OF BONE
Anatomy and physiology--Regeneration of bone--Transplantation of bone.
    DISEASES OF BONE--Definition of terms--Pyogenic diseases:
    disease--Hydatids; Rickets; Osteomalacia--Ostitis deformans of
    Paget--Osteomyelitis fibrosa--Affections of bones in diseases of
    the nervous system--Fragilitas ossium--Tumours and cysts of bone.
#Surgical Anatomy.#--During the period of growth, a long bone such as
the tibia consists of a shaft or _diaphysis_, and two extremities or
_epiphyses_. So long as growth continues there intervenes between the
cartilage--_the epiphysial cartilage_; and at the junction of this
cartilage with the shaft is a zone of young, vascular, spongy bone known
compact bone enclosing the medullary canal, which is filled with yellow
marrow. The extremities, which include the ossifying junctions, consist
of spongy bone, the spaces of which are filled with red marrow. The
articular aspect of the epiphysis is invested with a thick layer of
hyaline cartilage, known as the _articular cartilage_, which would
connected with the epiphysial cartilage and with the epiphysis, and at
the margin of the latter it becomes continuous with the capsule of the
cellular layer; the cells, which are called osteoblasts, are continuous
with those lining the Haversian canals and the medullary cavity.
The arrangement of the _blood vessels_ determines to some extent the
at the ossifying junction in a series of capillary loops projected
against the epiphysial cartilage. This arrangement favours the lodgment
accounts for the frequency with which diseases of bacterial origin
develop in the region of the ossifying junction. The diaphysis is also
nourished by numerous blood vessels from the periosteum, which penetrate
the cortex through the Haversian canals and anastomose with those
derived from the nutrient artery. The epiphyses are nourished by a
the adjacent joint. The veins of the marrow are of large calibre and are
The _nerves_ enter the marrow along with the arteries, and, being
derived from the sympathetic system, are probably chiefly concerned with
the innervation of the blood vessels, but they are also capable of
bone affections.
It has long been believed that _the function of the periosteum_ is to
form new bone, but this view has been questioned by Sir William Macewen,
exclusively formed by the cellular elements or osteoblasts: these are
found on the surface of the bone, lining the Haversian canals and in the
diseases of bone if the osteoblasts on the surface of the bone are still
regarded as forming the deeper layer of the periosteum.
part, and defective formation is often associated with atrophy, or more
the edentulous jaw and in the neck of the femur of a person advanced in
in the bones of the lower limbs of persons who are unable to stand or
walk, and in the distal portion of a bone which is the seat of an
ununited fracture. The same combination is seen in an exaggerated degree
of bone predominates; in children and adolescents, defective formation
smooth on the surface, and abnormally light.
kinds: for example, the secretion of certain glandular organs, such as
micro-organisms, such as the staphylococcus aureus and the spirochaete of
by the application of a Bier's bandage or that which accompanies a
The new bone is laid down on the surface, in the Haversian canals, or
in the cancellous spaces and medullary canal, or in all three
situations. The new bone on the surface sometimes takes the form of a
syphilis, sometimes as a uniform increase in the girth of the
_node_, and sometimes in the form of spicules, spoken of as
_osteophytes_. When the new bone is laid down in the Haversian canals,
obliteration of the medullary canal. Hyperostosis and sclerosis are
frequently met with in combination, a condition that is well illustrated
in the femur and tibia in tertiary syphilis; if the subject of this
condition is confined to bed for several months before his death, the
The _function of the epiphysial cartilage_ is to provide for the growth
this result, certain of them functionate more actively and for a longer
period than others. Those at the knee, for example, contribute more to
the last to unite. In the upper limb the more active epiphyses are at
the shoulder and wrist, and these also are the last to unite.
place unequally, and may go on more rapidly in one half of the disc than
bone be seriously interfered with. On the other hand, if it is not
infective focus, its bone-forming functions may be stimulated by the
paralysed limbs the growth from the epiphyses is usually little short of
the normal. The result of interference with growth is more injurious in
view, it is essential that the lower extremities should be approximately
bones, if the growth of one is arrested the continued growth of the
other results in a deviation of the hand or foot to one side.
In certain diseases, such as rickets and inherited syphilis, and in
developmental anomalies such as achondroplasia, _dwarfing_ of the
junctions results in abnormal height of the skeleton or _giantism_ as a
adolescents, and in eunuchs who have been castrated in childhood or
long bones is delayed beyond the usual period at which the skeleton
attains maturity.
result of injury or disease, it is capable of being reproduced, the
conditions. The chief part in the regeneration of bone is played by the
osteoblasts in the adjacent marrow and in the deeper layer of the
periosteum. The shaft of a long bone may be reproduced after having been
skull and the bones of the face, which are primarily developed in
membrane, have little capacity of regeneration; hence, when bone has
been lost or removed in these situations, there results a permanent
defect.
Wounds or defects in articular cartilage are repaired by fibrous or
_Transplantation of Bone--Bone-grafting._--Clinical experience is
fracture--may become, if replaced in position, firmly and permanently
other hand, such as ivory pegs or decalcified bone, exhibit, on removal
after a sufficient interval, evidence of having been eroded, in the
shape of worm-eaten depressions and perforations, and do not become
when placed under favourable conditions survives and becomes
merely act as a scaffolding. We believe also that the retention of the
periosteum on the graft is not essential, but, by favouring the
the graft and the success of the transplantation. Macewen maintains that
bone grafts "take" better if broken up into small fragments; we regard
this as unnecessary. Bone grafts yield better functional results when
they are immovably fixed to the adjacent bone by suture, pegs, or
Transplanted bone retains its vitality when embedded in the soft parts,
The morbid processes met with in bone originate in the same way and lead
to the same results as do similar processes in other tissues. The
which take place in the skeleton during the period of growth, modify
_Definition of Terms._--Any diseased process that affects the periosteum
it is located in the marrow. The term _epiphysitis_ has been applied to
an inflammatory process in two distinct situations--namely, the
restrict the term to inflammation in the first of these situations.
The term _rarefying ostitis_ is applied to any process that is attended
with excessive absorption of the framework of a bone, whereby it becomes
more porous or spongy than it was before, a condition known as
The term _caries_ is employed to indicate any diseased process
destruction in the soft parts. The carious process is preceded by the
formation of granulation tissue in the marrow or periosteum, which eats
degeneration and death of the granulation tissue under the necrotic
influence of bacterial toxins results in disintegration and crumbling
away of the trabecular framework of the portion of bone affected.
pressure of the probe. The macerated bone presents a rough, eroded
The term _dry caries_ (_caries sicca_) is applied to that variety which
_Necrosis_ is the term applied to the death of a tangible portion of
process of erosion by which the dead bone has been separated from the
tuberculous, and the syphilitic.
recognised according to whether the organisms concerned reach their seat
of action by way of the blood-stream, or through an infection of the
INFECTIONS THROUGH THE BLOOD-STREAM
#Diseases caused by the Staphylococcus Aureus.#--As the majority of
pyogenic diseases are due to infection with the staphylococcus aureus,
these will be described first.
children, but is rare after the skeleton has attained maturity. Boys are
_Etiology._--Staphylococci gain access to the blood-stream in various
factors.
end of the tibia and the lower end of the femur; the other bones of the
skeleton are affected in rare instances.
_Pathology._--The disease commences and is most intense in the marrow of
the ossifying junction at one end of the diaphysis; it may commence at
both ends simultaneously--_bipolar osteomyelitis_; or, commencing at one
end, may spread to the other.
The changes observed are those of intense engorgement of the marrow,
going on to greenish-yellow purulent infiltration. Where the process is
Haversian canals undergo enlargement and become filled with
greenish-yellow pus. This rarefaction of the spongy bone is the earliest
change seen with the X-rays.
The process may remain localised to the ossifying junction, but usually
spreads along the medullary canal for a varying distance, and also
pus accumulates under the periosteum and lifts it up from the bone. The
close correspondence. The periosteum of the diaphysis is easily
separated--hence the facility with which the pus spreads along the
cartilage. Less frequently there is more than one collection of pus
the subjacent marrow. The pus perforates the periosteum, and makes its
way to the surface by the easiest anatomical route, and discharges
may take place. The infection may spread to the adjacent joint, either
directly through the epiphysis and articular cartilage, or along the
While the occurrence of purely periosteal suppuration is regarded as
The portion of the diaphysis which has sustained the action of the
stripping of the periosteum and thrombosis of the blood vessels of the
marrow, so that _necrosis_ of bone is one of the most striking results
two, the term _acute necrosis_, formerly applied to the disease, was
amply justified.
When there is marked rarefaction of the bone at the ossifying junction,
the epiphysis is liable to be separated--_epiphysiolysis_. The
separation usually takes place through the young bone of the ossifying
junction, and the surfaces of the diaphysis and epiphysis are opposed to
each other by irregular eroded surfaces bathed in pus. The separated
detached by the formation of pus beneath it, the epiphysis is liable to
be displaced by muscular action or by some movement of the limb, or it
is the diaphysis that is displaced, for example, the lower end of the
diaphysis of the femur may be projected into the popliteal space.
but when it has been seriously damaged or displaced, the further growth
of the bone in length may be interfered with. Sometimes the separated
The adjacent joint may become filled at an early stage with a serous
effusion, which may be sterile. When the cocci gain access to the joint,
its frequency during the earlier years of life, has been called _the
Separation of an epiphysis nearly always results in infection and
destruction of the adjacent joint.
Osteomyelitis is rare in the bones of the carpus and tarsus, and the
associated joints are usually infected from the outset. In flat bones,
such as the skull, the scapula, or the ilium, suppuration usually occurs
on both aspects of the bone as well as in the marrow.
associated toxaemia, vary considerably in different cases. In mild cases
the temperature rises rapidly with a rigor and runs an irregular course
headache, vomiting, and sometimes delirium.
The local manifestations are pain and tenderness in relation to one of
most valuable diagnostic sign. At a later stage there is an ill-defined
swelling in the region of the ossifying junction, with oedema of the
The swelling appears earlier and is more definite in superficial bones
such as the tibia, than in those more deeply placed such as the upper
end of the femur. It may be less evident to the eye than to the fingers,
and is best appreciated by gently stroking the bone from the middle of
redness of the skin, especially over a superficial bone, such as the
tibia, the swelling becomes softer, and gives evidence of fluctuation.
some days.
Suppuration spreads towards the surface, until, some days later, the
the pain and other symptoms are relieved. The pus may contain blood and
particles of bone are present also. The presence of fat and bony
particles in the pus confirms the medullary origin of the suppuration.
accurately with the extent of the lesion in the marrow.
_Local Complications._--The adjacent joint may exhibit symptoms which
vary from those of a simple effusion to those of a purulent _arthritis_.
in the case of the hip, may so predominate as to overshadow those of the
bone lesion from which they originated.
_Separation and displacement of the epiphysis_ usually reveals itself by
associated with suppuration in the adjacent joint.
When _pathological fracture_ of the shaft occurs, as it may do, from
hip; it may result from effusion into the joint and stretching of the
ligaments, or may be the sequel of a purulent arthritis; the signs of
dislocation are not so obvious as might be expected, but it is attended
with an alteration in the attitude of the limb, and the displacement of
_General Complications._--In some cases a _multiplicity of lesions_ in
the bones and joints imparts to the disease the features of pyaemia. The
occurrence of endocarditis, as indicated by alterations in the heart
lungs, as well as in other bones and joints than those primarily
affected. The secondary suppurations are liable to be overlooked unless
In these multiple forms of osteomyelitis the toxaemic symptoms
irregular, the pulse small and rapid, and the urine may contain blood
and the patient may cry out as in meningitis. The post-mortem
_Differential Diagnosis._--Acute osteomyelitis is to be diagnosed from
When there is early and pronounced general intoxication, there is likely
to be confusion with other acute febrile illnesses, such as scarlet
fever. In all febrile conditions in children and adolescents, the
ossifying junctions of the long bones should be examined for areas of
pain and tenderness.
Osteomyelitis has many features in common with acute articular
symptoms predominate, there is an absence of suppuration, and the pains
location--the vertebrae, skull, pelvis, and lower jaw being specially
unfavourable--with the multiplicity of the lesions, and with the
development of endocarditis and internal metastases.
infections.
established, and in the meantime preparations for operation should be
made. An incision is made down to and through the periosteum, and
whether pus is found or not, the bone should be opened in the vicinity
of the ossifying junction by means of a drill, gouge, or trephine. If
pus is found, the opening in the bone is extended along the shaft as far
which are loosely tied to afford sufficient space between them for the
When there is widespread suppuration in the marrow, and the shaft is
extensively bared of periosteum and appears likely to die, it may be
resected straight away or after an interval of a day or two. Early
canal is not followed by relief of symptoms. In the leg and forearm, the
unaffected bone maintains the length and contour of the limb; in the
object.
endangered by toxaemia, which is attributed to the primary lesion. It may
be called for later if the limb is likely to be useless, as, for
example, when the whole shaft of the bone is dead without the formation
of a new case, when the epiphyses are separated and displaced, and the
joints are disorganised.
cleared out from both aspects of the bone. In the vertebrae, operative
interference is usually restricted to opening and draining the
associated abscess.
#Nature's Effort at Repair.#--_In cases which are left to nature_, and
in which necrosis of bone has occurred, those portions of the periosteum
and marrow which have retained their vitality resume their osteogenetic
lifted up by an accumulation of pus, or is in contact with bone that is
dead, it proceeds to form new bone with great activity, so that the dead
_involucrum_ (Fig. 118). Where the periosteum has been perforated by pus
position to the sinuses in the skin, in passing a probe down one of the
lying in the interior. If the periosteum has been extensively
destroyed, new bone may only be formed in patches, or not at all. The
dead bone is separated from the living by the agency of granulation
tissue with its usual complements of phagocytes and osteoclasts, so that
pitted, grooved, and worm-eaten appearance, except on the periosteal
aspect, which is unaltered. Ultimately the dead bone becomes loose and
formed by the new case, lined with granulation tissue. The separation of
the sequestrum takes place more rapidly in the spongy bone of the
ossifying junction than in the compact bone of the shaft.
included by the new case; each portion of dead bone is slowly separated,
Even at a distance from the actual necrosis there is formation of new
bone by the marrow; the medullary canal is often obliterated, and the
bone becomes heavier and denser--sclerosis; and the new bone which is
the bone--hyperostosis.
[Illustration: FIG. 118.--Shaft of Femur after Acute Osteomyelitis. The
shaft has undergone extensive necrosis, and a shell of new bone has been
_Pathological fracture_ of the shaft may occur at the site of necrosis,
is most frequently met with in the shaft of the femur. Short of
results in deformity and shortening of the limb (Fig. 119).
The _extrusion of a sequestrum_ may occur, provided there is a cloaca
partial extrusion of the dead bone may cause complications, as when a
pelvis perforates the wall of the urinary bladder.
The extent to which bone which has been lost is reproduced varies in
different parts of the skeleton: while the long bones, the scapula, the
mandible, and other bones which are developed in cartilage are almost
completely re-formed, bones which are entirely developed in membrane,
[Illustration: FIG. 119.--Femur and Tibia showing results of Acute
Osteomyelitis affecting Trigone of Femur; sequestrum partly surrounded
It may be instructive to describe _the X-ray appearances of a long bone
to have caused necrosis of part of the diaphysis. The shadow of the dead
it is of the same shape and density as the original shaft, while its
separation. The sequestrum is separated from the living bone by a clear
zone which corresponds to the layer of granulations lining the cavity in
from that of the living bone by which it is surrounded is conclusive
evidence of a sequestrum. The medullary canal in the vicinity of the
sequestrum being obliterated, is represented by a shadow of varying
new case or involucrum with its wavy contour is also in evidence, with
its openings or cloacae, and is mainly responsible for the increase in
the diameter of the bone.
epiphysis and destruction of the articular surfaces or dislocation of
_Sequelae of Acute Suppurative Osteomyelitis._--The commonest sequel is
the presence of a sequestrum with one or more discharging sinuses; owing
to the abundant formation of scar tissue these sinuses have rigid edges
which are usually depressed and adherent to the bone.
_The Recognition and Removal of Sequestra._--So long as there is dead
mere persistence of discharge after an attack of osteomyelitis, is
or more sinuses, the passage of a probe which strikes bare bone affords
corroboration of the view that the bone has perished. When the dead bone
information.
The traditional practice is to wait until the dead bone is entirely
the one hand, of leaving portions behind which may keep up the
This practice need not be adhered to, as by operating at an earlier
separation of the dead bone, drainage should be improved, and the
infective element combated by the induction of hyperaemia.
_The operation_ for the removal of the dead bone (_sequestrectomy_)
consists in opening up the periosteum and the new case sufficiently to
sequestra. The limb having been rendered bloodless, existing sinuses are
enlarged, but if these are inconveniently situated--for example, in the
centre of the popliteal space in necrosis of the femoral trigone--it is
better to make a fresh wound down to the bone on that aspect of the
limb which affords best access, and which entails the least injury of
the soft parts. The periosteum, which is thick and easily separable, is
enough of the new bone is taken away to allow of the removal of the
sequestrum. Care must be taken not to leave behind any fragment of dead
bone, as this will interfere with healing, and may determine a relapse
of suppuration.
away with a spoon, and the cavity is disinfected.
There are different ways of dealing with a _bone cavity_. It may be
changed at intervals until healing takes place from the bottom; it may
be filled with a flap of bone and periosteum raised from the vicinity,
be chiselled through at its base, so that it can be brought into contact
with the opposite wall. The method of filling bone cavities devised by
Mosetig-Moorhof, consists in disinfecting and drying the cavity by a
current of hot air, and filling it with a mixture of powdered iodoform
(60 parts) and oil of sesame and spermaceti (each 40 parts), which is
fluid at a temperature of 112 o F.; the soft parts are then brought
together without drainage. As the cavity fills up with new bone the
iodoform is gradually absorbed. Iodoform gives a dark shadow with the
These procedures may be carried out at the same time as the sequestrum
The _deformities_ resulting from osteomyelitis are more marked the
earlier in life the disease occurs. Even under favourable conditions,
sometimes curving of the bone. Under less favourable conditions, the
late results of osteomyelitis may be more serious. _Shortening_ is not
observed chiefly in the bones of the leg. Where there are two parallel
bones--as in the leg, for example--the growth of the diseased bone may
be impaired, and the other continuing its normal growth becomes
bone is exaggerated, and it becomes the longer of the two. In either
case, the longer bone becomes curved. An _obliquity_ of the bone may
other half continues to form bone, giving rise to such deformities as
knock-knee and club-hand.
Deformity may also result from vicious union of a pathological fracture,
#Relapsing Osteomyelitis.#--As the term indicates, the various forms of
relapsing osteomyelitis date back to an antecedent attack, and their
occurrence depends on the capacity of staphylococci to lie latent in the
marrow.
at regular intervals for several years, the tendency, however, being for
the attacks to become milder as the virulence of the organisms becomes
_Clinical Features._--Osteomyelitis in a patient over twenty-five is
nearly always of the relapsing variety. In some cases the bone becomes
escape by new channels, or one of the old sinuses may re-open.
bone, both as it is altered by the original attack and by the changes
that attend the relapse of the infective process.
severe pain, if relief is not afforded by the repeated application of
form of relapsing osteomyelitis is the circumscribed abscess of bone
_Morbid Anatomy._[7]--The abscess is nearly always situated in the
middle of the shaft. In exceptional cases there is more than one abscess
end of the femur, or either end of the humerus, may be the seat of the
abscess. In the quiescent stage the lesion is represented by a small
cavity in the bone, filled with clear serum, and lined by a fibrous
sclerosed, and the medullary canal is obliterated. When the infection
greenish-yellow pus from which the staphylococcus can be isolated, and
the cavity is lined by a thin film of granulation tissue which erodes
is more active at some points than others, diverticula or tunnels are
formed, and one of these may finally erupt through the shell of the bone
found within the abscess cavity. In long-standing cases it is common to
find extensive obliteration of the medullary canal, and a considerable
[7] Alexis Thomson, _Edin. Med. Journ._, 1906.
Abscess. The specimen shows two separate abscesses in the centre of the
shaft, the lower one quiescent, the upper one active and increasing in
also be curved or otherwise deformed as a result of the original attack
of osteomyelitis.
tension within the abscess, is the dominant symptom. At first it is
the bone, and is described as "boring." It is aggravated by use of the
which the pain becomes excruciating. In the early stages there are
periods of days or weeks during which the symptoms abate, but as the
abscess increases these become shorter, until the patient is hardly ever
The pain induced by the traction of muscles attached to the bone, or by
the weight of the body, may interfere with the function of the limb, and
from _involvement of the adjacent joint_, in which there may be an
intermittent hydrops which comes and goes coincidently with
exacerbations of pain; or the abscess may perforate the joint and set up
The _diagnosis_ of Brodie's abscess from other affections met with at
patient referring all the symptoms to the joint.
which are liable to be confused with Brodie's abscess--gumma, tubercle,
myeloma, chondroma, and sarcoma--give a well-marked central clear area;
the sclerosis around Brodie's abscess gives a dense shadow in which the
in exploring the interior of the bone. It is exposed by a suitable
directions.
[Illustration: FIG. 121.--Radiogram of Brodie's Abscess in Lower End of
Tibia.]
#Other Forms of Acute Osteomyelitis.#--Among the less severe forms of
osteomyelitis resulting from the action of attenuated organisms are the
periosteum; and _growth fever_, in which the child complains of vague
evanescent pains (growing pains), and of feeling tired and disinclined
Infection with the _staphylococcus albus_, the _streptococcus_, or the
_pneumococcus_ also causes a mild form of osteomyelitis which may go on
_Necrosis without suppuration_, described by Paget under the name "quiet
a considerable extent of a long bone. The pain varies in intensity, and
may be continuous or intermittent, and there is tenderness on pressure.
The shaft is increased in girth as a result of its being surrounded by a
characteristic "leg of mutton" shape. In both diseases there is a
tendency to pathological fracture. It is difficult also in the absence
tuberculous disease. If the diagnosis is not established after
examination with the X-rays, an exploratory incision should be made; if
dead bone is found, it is removed.
bacillus_, which may set up osteomyelitis soon after its lodgment, or it
may lie latent for a considerable period before doing so. The lesions
both, and they may or may not be attended with suppuration. They are
most commonly met with in the tibia and in the ribs at the
costo-chondral junctions.
The bone lesions usually occur during the seventh or eighth week of the
of vague pains, at first referred to several bones, later becoming
localised in one; they are aggravated by movement, or by handling the
bone, and are worst at night. There is redness and oedema of the
exceptional.
and by obtaining a positive Widal reaction.
The prognosis is favourable, but recovery is apt to be slow, and relapse
is not uncommon.
occurs in a rib it may be necessary to resect a portion of bone.
#Pyogenic Osteomyelitis due to Spread of Infection from the Soft
Parts.#--There still remain those forms of osteomyelitis which result
fractures, gun-shot injuries, osteotomies, amputations, resections, or
operations for un-united fracture. In all of these the marrow is exposed
to infection by such organisms as are present in the wound. A similar
form of osteomyelitis may occur apart from a wound--for example,
skull, from lesions of the scalp or of the cranial bones
themselves--such as a syphilitic gumma or a sarcoma which has fungated
ear.
The most common is an osteomyelitis commencing in the marrow exposed in
necrosis takes place, the sequestrum is annular, affecting the
cross-section of the bone at the saw-line; or tubular, extending up the
shaft, and tapering off above. The periosteum is more easily detached,
is thicker than normal, and is actively engaged in forming bone. In the
macerated specimen, the new bone presents a characteristic coral-like
[Illustration: FIG. 122.--Tubular Sequestrum resulting from Septic
Osteomyelitis in Amputation Stump.]
of septic phlebitis in the marrow.
The _clinical features_ of osteomyelitis in _an amputation stump_ are
those of ordinary pyogenic infection; the involvement of the bone may be
the persistence of suppuration in spite of free drainage, but it is not
the deposit of new bone on the periosteal surface; later, there is the
shadow of the sequestrum.
Healing does not take place until the sequestrum is extruded or removed
_In compound fractures_, if a fragment dies and forms a sequestrum, it
is apt to be walled in by new bone; the sinuses continue to discharge
until the sequestrum is removed. Even after healing has taken place,
may subside under rest and elevation of the limb and the application of
a compress, or an abscess forms and bursts with comparatively little
suffering. The contents may be clear yellow serum or watery pus;
sometimes a small spicule of bone is discharged. Valuable information,
[Illustration: FIG. 123.--New Periosteal Bone on surface of Femur from
resulted in necrosis at the sawn section of the bone. (Anatomical
The tuberculous diseases of bone result from infection of the marrow or
periosteum by tubercle bacilli conveyed through the arteries; it is
the bacilli being usually derived from some pre-existing focus in the
Fraser, 60 per cent. of the cases of bone and joint tubercle in children
are due to the bovine bacillus, 37 per cent. to the human variety, and
Tuberculous disease in bone is characterised by its insidious onset and
disease of the adjacent joint.
#Periosteal tuberculosis# is met with in the ribs, sternum, vertebral
may originate in the periosteum, or may spread thence from the marrow,
tuberculous granulation tissue in the deeper layer of the periosteum,
and its subsequent caseation and liquefaction, is attended by the
painful, although tender on pressure. While the swelling often remains
quiescent for some time, it tends to increase in size, to become boggy
perforates the fibrous layer of the periosteum, invading and infecting
arrangement of the tissues. The size of the abscess affords no
indication of the extent of the bone lesion from which it originates. As
the abscess reaches the surface, the skin becomes of a dusky red or
sinus. A probe passed into the sinus strikes carious bone. Small
_In deeply seated bones_, such as the upper end of the femur, the
_Diagnosis._--Before the stage of cold abscess is reached, the localised
staphylococcal osteomyelitis, from enlarged bursa or ganglion, from
sub-periosteal lipoma, and from sarcoma. Most difficulty is met with in
_X-ray appearances in periosteal tubercle_: the surface of the cortical
bone in the area of disease is roughened and irregular by erosion, and
in the vicinity there may be a deposit of new bone on the surface,
particularly if a sinus is present and mixed infection has occurred; in
_syphilis_ the shadow of the bone is denser as a result of sclerosis,
and there is usually more new bone on the surface--hyperostosis; in
irregularity in the contour of the cortical bone, and frequently there
is evidence of formation of bone in the form of characteristic spicules
The early recognition of periosteal lesions in the articular ends of
The _treatment_ is that of tuberculous lesions in general; if
iodoform, and removal of the infected tissues with the sharp spoon. In
the ribs it is more satisfactory to remove the diseased portion of bone
is stitched up with the object of obtaining primary union; otherwise it
#Tuberculous Osteomyelitis.#--Tuberculous lesions in the marrow occur as
isolated or as multiple foci of granulation tissue, which replace the
marrow and erode the trabeculae of bone in the vicinity (Fig. 124). The
bacillus and the marrow interact upon one another. The granulation
encapsulated by fibrous tissue--"encysted tubercle."
excised from a boy aet. 8. Note well-defined caseous focus, with several
minute foci in surrounding marrow.]
Sometimes the tuberculous granulation tissue spreads in the marrow,
assuming the characters of a diffuse infiltration--diffuse tuberculous
only irregular fragments or sequestra of microscopic dimensions remain
to by the formation of new bone, resulting in a remarkable degree of
sclerosis, and if, following upon this, there is caseation of the
tubercle and death of the affected portion of bone, there results a
because of the sclerosis and surrounding endarteritis, is exceedingly
slow in separating. When the sequestrum involves an articular surface it
tissue, and is readily identified in a radiogram. This type of sclerosis
[Illustration: FIG. 125.--Tuberculous Disease of Child's Tibia,
excess of new bone.]
tuberculous disease in the marrow gives rise to signs sufficiently
the bones of deeply seated joints, such as the hip or shoulder, the
existence of tuberculous lesions in the marrow can only be inferred from
With few exceptions, tuberculous disease in the interior of a bone does
not reveal its presence until by extension it reaches one or other of
the surfaces of the bone. In the shaft of a long bone its eruption on
the periosteal surface is usually followed by the formation of a cold
abscess in the overlying soft parts. When situated in the articular ends
of bones, the disease more often erupts in relation to the reflection of
case giving rise to disease of the joint (Fig. 156).
Tibia.
(Photograph lent by Sir H. J. Stiles.)]
ulna in children (Fig. 126). It commences at the growing extremity of
which causes thickening of the diaphysis; this is most marked at the
ossifying junction and tapers off along the shaft. The infection not
only spreads along the medulla, but it invades the spongy bone
periosteum gives way, and an abscess forms in the soft parts; and if
satisfactory _treatment_ is to resect sub-periosteally the diseased
caseous infiltration in the marrow, and this may be attended with the
involving its outer shell, as shown in Fig. 127. The situation and
tuberculous granulation tissue erupts through the cortex of the bone, it
sheaths.
[Illustration: FIG. 127.--Advanced Tuberculous Disease in region of
Ankle. The ankle-joint is ankylosed, and there is a large sequestrum in
(Specimen in Anatomical Museum, University of Edinburgh.)]
If an exact diagnosis is made at an early stage of the disease--and this
is often possible with the aid of X-rays--the affected bone is excised
sub-periosteally or its interior is cleared out with the sharp spoon and
gouge, the latter procedure being preferred in the case of the
_calcaneus_ to conserve the stability of the heel. When several bones
mixed infection, amputation is usually indicated, especially in adults.
#Tuberculous dactylitis# is the name applied to a diffuse form of the
lesion presents, on a small scale, all the anatomical changes that have
been described as occurring in the medulla of the tibia or ulna, and
finger or toe, indolent, painless, and interfering but little with the
function of the digit. Recovery may eventually occur without
which bursts and forms one or more sinuses. It may be difficult to
differentiate tuberculous dactylitis from the enlargement of the
the functional results are usually better than those following upon
operative treatment, although in either case the affected finger is
liable to be dwarfed (Fig. 129). The finger should be immobilised in a
interference is indicated if a cold abscess develops, if there is a
persistent sinus, or if a sequestrum has formed, a point upon which
information is obtained by examination with the X-rays. When a toe is
affected, amputation is the best treatment, but in the case of a finger
it is rarely called for. In the case of a metacarpal or metatarsal bone,
[Illustration: FIG. 129.--Shortening of Middle Finger of Adult, the
result of Tuberculous Dactylitis in childhood.]
Syphilitic affections of bone may be met with at any period of the
disease, but the graver forms occur in the tertiary stage of acquired
due to pyogenic and tuberculous infectious, and they show a marked
tuberculous affections in the frequency with which they attack the
shafts of bones rather than the articular ends, and in the comparative
rarity of joint complications.
_Evanescent periostitis_ is met with in acquired syphilis during the
period of the early skin eruptions. The patient complains, especially at
night, of pains over the frontal bone, ribs, sternum, tibiae, or ulnae.
swelling, which, however, rarely amounts to what may be described as a
In the later stages of acquired syphilis, _gummatous periostitis and
osteomyelitis_ occur, and are characterised by the formation in the
periosteum and marrow of circumscribed gummata or of a diffuse gummatous
infiltration. The framework of the bone is rarefied in the area
gummatous tissue degenerates and breaks down, and especially if the
overlying skin is perforated and septic infection is superadded, the
bone disintegrates and exhibits the condition known as _syphilitic
caries_; sometimes a portion of bone has its blood supply so far
interfered with that it dies--_syphilitic necrosis_. Syphilitic
sequestra are heavier and denser than normal bone, because sclerosis
_In the bones of the skull_, gummata may form in the peri-cranium,
depression or an actual perforation of the calvaria; multiple gummata
tend to fuse with one another at their margins, giving the appearance of
cut it off from its blood supply (Fig. 130). If the overlying skin is
is apt to die and furnish a sequestrum; the separation of the dead bone
is extremely slow, partly from the want of vascularity in the sclerosed
bone round about, and partly from the density of the sequestrum. In
exceptional cases the necrosis involves the entire vertical plate of the
pachymeningitis), and this may be followed by cerebral abscess or by
displacement of the eye and paralysis of the ocular muscles.
sequestrum in process of separation.]
On the inner surface of the skull, the formation of gummatous tissue may
cause pressure on the brain and give rise to intense pain in the head,
Jacksonian epilepsy, or paralysis, the symptoms varying with the seat
and extent of the disease. The cranial nerves may be pressed upon at the
symptoms of irritation or paralysis in the area of distribution of the
nerves affected.
gummatous disease causes ulceration, which, beginning in the mucous
infection leads to caries and necrosis. In the nose, the disease is
attended with stinking discharge (ozoena), the extrusion of portions of
so that the air escapes through the nose in speaking, giving to the
voice a characteristic nasal tone.
periosteum may be localised and result in the formation of a
irregular nodular enlargement (Fig. 132). If the bone is macerated, it
is found to be heavier and bulkier than normal; there is diffuse
uneven from heaping up of new bone--hyperostosis (Fig. 131). If a
surrounding bone to such an extent that the shaft undergoes pathological
fracture. In the rare cases in which it attacks the articular end of a
long bone, gummatous disease may implicate the adjacent joint and give
Tibia, on section and on surface view.]
has been ascribed to compression of the nerves in the narrowed Haversian
The _periosteal gumma_ appears as a smooth, circumscribed swelling which
is soft and elastic in the centre and firm at the margins, and shades
off into the surrounding bone. The gumma may be completely absorbed or
centre, the skin becomes adherent, thin, and red, and finally gives way.
The opening in the skin persists as a sinus, or develops into a typical
ulcer with irregular, crescentic margins; in either case a probe reveals
and waxy degeneration in the viscera may ultimately be induced.
erupts through the shell and reaches the periosteal surface or invades
characteristic. When there is hyperostosis and sclerosis, the shaft
appears denser and broader than normal, and the contour is uneven or
sclerosis round about.
of the disease, the result of examination with the X-rays, and the
results of specific tests and treatment.
_Treatment._--The general health is to be improved by open air, by
derived from them is usually marked.
Radiograms show the rapid absorption of the new bone both on the surface
and in the marrow, and are of value in establishing the therapeutic
diagnosis.
little effect. In cases of persistent or relapsing gummatous disease
with ulceration of skin, it is often necessary to remove the diseased
soft parts with the sharp spoon and scissors, and to gouge or chisel
When hyperostosis and sclerosis of the bone is attended with severe pain
which does not yield to blistering, the periosteum may be incised and
the sclerosed bone perforated with a drill or trephine.
flat bones of the skull undergo absorption in patches, was formerly
regarded as syphilitic, but it is now known to result from prolonged
malnutrition from any cause. _Bossing of the skull_ resulting in the
syphilitic affections. The lesions in infancy--epiphysitis, bossing of
_Epiphysitis or Syphilitic Perichondritis._--The first of these terms is
misleading, because the lesion involves the ossifying junction and the
shaft of the bone, and the epiphysis only indirectly. The young bone is
that the muscles are inserted and drag on the perichondrium when
movement occurs; swelling is most marked in the vicinity of the joint,
and it may be added to by effusion into the synovial cavity. The baby,
usually under six months, is noticed to be feverish and fretful and to
a particular limb, usually the arm, as the humerus, radius, and ulna are
the acquired disease, but as they affect bones which are still actively
growing, the effects are more striking. Gummatous disease may come and
go over periods of many years, with the result that the external
profoundly altered. In the tibia, for example, the shaft is bowed
forward in a gentle curve, which is compared to the curve of a
sabre--"sabre-blade" deformity (Fig. 132). The diffuse thickening all
round the bone obscures the sharp margins so that the bone becomes
actually increased in length as well as in girth.
[Illustration: FIG. 132.--Sabre-blade Deformity of Left Tibia in
Inherited Syphilis.
The contrast between the grossly enlarged and misshapen tibia and the
acquired disease. When curving of the tibia causes disability in
same time or in succession. The lesion consists in a gummatous
infiltration of the soft parts surrounding the phalanx, or a gummatous
discharge, or to the formation of a sequestrum as is so common in
dorsal aspect, and, according to the distribution and extent of the
disease, it is acorn-shaped, fusiform, or cylindrical. It is firm and
elastic, and usually painless. The movements are impaired, especially if
This rare disease results from the lodgment of the embryos of the taenia
echinoccus, which are conveyed to the marrow by the blood-stream. The
cysts are small, usually about the size of a pin-head, and they are
of the skeleton most often affected are the articular ends of the long
bones, the bodies of the vertebrae, and the pelvis.
As the cysts increase in number and in size, the framework of the bone
thin, and pathological fracture may result. The bone becomes expanded,
cellular tissue, and when thus freed from confinement may attain
the adjacent joint.
_Clinical Features._--The patient complains of deep-seated pains. In
be possible to recognise egg-shell crackling, or unequal consistence of
column, hydatids give rise to angular deformity and paraplegia. In the
pelvis, there is usually great enlargement of the bones, and when
fatally.
Examination with the X-rays shows the characteristic excavations of the
central tumour, gumma, tuberculosis, or abscess of bone.
The _treatment_ consists in thorough eradication of the parasite by
the extent of the disease, and the raw surfaces swabbed with 1 per cent.
with suppuration, amputation affords the best chance of recovery.
The lesions in the bones resulting from _actinomycosis_ and from
_mycetoma_, have been described with these diseases.
CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES ATTENDED WITH LESIONS IN THE BONES
These include rickets, scurvy-rickets, osteomalacia, ostitis deformans,
osteomyelitis fibrosa, fragilitas ossium, and diseases of the nervous
RICKETS
Rickets or rachitis is a constitutional disease associated with
disturbance of nutrition, and attended with changes in the skeleton.
The disease is most common and most severe among the children of the
poorer classes in large cities, who are improperly fed and are brought
up in unhealthy surroundings. There is evidence that the most important
factors in the causation of rickets are ill-health of the mother during
pregnancy, and the administration to the child after its birth of food
which is defective in animal fat, proteids, and salts of lime, or which
occurrence of the disease is favoured, and its features are aggravated,
by imperfect oxygenation of the blood as the result of a deficiency of
fresh air and sunlight, want of exercise, and by other conditions which
prevail in the slums of large towns.
(malacia) of the bones, due to excessive absorption of osseous tissue,
other mechanical forces.
The _periosteum_ is thick and vascular, and when detached carries with
it plates and spicules of soft porous bone. The new bone may be so
bones of the skull this may be heaped up in the form of bosses or ridges
In the epiphysial cartilages and at the ossifying junctions, all the
processes concerned in ossification, excepting the deposition of lime
salts, occur to an exaggerated degree. The cartilage of the epiphysial
disc proliferates actively and irregularly, so that it becomes softer,
the lower end of the radius and lower end of the tibia, and at the
costo-chondral junctions where the series of beaded swellings is known
vascular; and the new bone that is formed is imperfectly calcified. The
result is that the bones may never attain their normal length, and they
remain stunted throughout life as in rickety dwarfs (Fig. 133), or the
shafts may grow unequally and come to deviate from their normal axes as
[Illustration: FIG. 133.--Skeleton of Rickety Dwarf, known as
well-defined narrow line which represents the epiphysial cartilage,
there is an ill-defined, blurred zone of considerable depth.
bone, the cortex becomes porous, the spongy bone is rarefied, and the
disease is arrested, a process of repair sets in which often results in
the skull, the absorption may result in the entire disappearance of
areas of bone, leaving a membrane which dimples like thin cardboard
under the pressure of the finger--a condition known as _craniotabes_.
_Changes in the Skeleton before the Child is able to walk._--The
the frontal and parietal eminences are unduly prominent. There is
The jaws are altered so that while the upper jaw is contracted into the
shape of a #V#, the lower jaw is square instead of rounded in outline,
and the teeth do not oppose one another. In the _thorax_, the chief
feature may be the beading at the costo-chondral junctions, principally
particularly if respiration is interfered with as a result of bronchial
catarrh or adenoids. The contraction may take the form of a vertical
groove on each side, or of a horizontal groove at the level of the upper
end of the xiphi-sternum; when the sternum and cartilages form a
projection in front, the deformity is known as "pigeon-breast."
The _spine_ may be curved backwards--_kyphosis_--throughout its
In the _limbs_, the prominent features are the deficient growth in
length of the long bones, the enlargements at the epiphysial junctions,
and the bending, and occasional greenstick fracture, of the shafts. The
degree of enlargement of the epiphysial junctions is directly
proportionate to the amount of movement to which the bone is subjected
(John Thomson). The curves at this stage depend on the attitude of the
child while sitting or being carried--for example, the arm bones become
bent in children who paddle about the floor with the aid of their arms;
vara. The clavicle or humerus may sustain greenstick fracture from the
result for the most part from yielding of the softened bones under the
weight of the body. Scoliosis is the usual type of spinal curvature, and
in extreme cases it may lead to a pronounced form of hump-back. The
pelvis may remain small (_justo-minor pelvis_), or it may be contracted
in the sagittal plane (_flat pelvis_); when the bones are unusually
the weight of the body, and the pelvis assumes the shape of a trefoil,
and laterally; the bones of the leg laterally as in bow-leg, or
forwards, or forwards and laterally just above the ankle. The
deformities at the knee (genu valgum, genu varum, and genu recurvatum),
the Extremities.
deformities resulting from rickets rather than from the active disease.
who recover may ultimately show no trace of rickets, and this is
especially true of children who grow at the average rate; in those,
however, in whom growth is retarded, especially from the fifth to the
that the scoliosis due to rickets has little tendency towards recovery.
diet, improving the surroundings, and preventing deformity. Phosphorus
in doses of 100th grain may be given dissolved in cod-liver oil, and
preparations of iron and lime may be added with advantage. To avoid
those postures which predispose to deformities, the child should lie as
much as possible. In the well-to-do classes this is readily accomplished
by the aid of a nurse and the use of a perambulator. In hospital
splint applied to the lateral aspect of each lower extremity, and
extending from the pelvis to 6 inches beyond the sole.
or not there is any prospect of the bone straightening naturally. Under
five years of age this may, as a rule, be confidently expected; the
child should be kept off its feet, and the limbs bathed and massaged. In
children of five or six and upwards, the prospect of natural
straightening is a diminishing one, and it is more satisfactory to
correct the deformity by operation. In rickety curvature of the spine,
the child should lie on a firm mattress, or, to allow of its being taken
occiput to the heels; the muscles acting on the trunk should be braced
up by massage and appropriate exercises.
#Late Rickets# or #Rachitis Adolescentium# is met with at any age from
nine to seventeen, and is generally believed to be due to a
disease is not attended with any disturbance of the general health; the
pathological changes are the same as in infantile rickets, but are for
the most part confined to the ossifying junctions, especially those
which are most active during adolescence, for example at the knee-joint.
The patient is easily tired, complains of pain in the bones, and, unless
care is taken, deformity is liable to ensue. There can be no doubt that
deformities which occur at or near puberty, especially knock-knee and
bow-knee.
#Scurvy-Rickets# or #Infantile Scurvy#.--This disease, described by
Barlow and Cheadle, is met with in infants under two years who have been
foods, and is most common in the well-to-do classes. The haemorrhages,
which are so characteristic of the disease, are usually preceded for
some weeks by a cachectic condition, with listlessness and debility and
of his lower limbs--pseudo-paralysis--and screams if it is touched; a
swelling is found over one of the bones, usually the femur, accompanied
by exquisite tenderness; the skin is tense and shiny, and there may be
some oedema. These symptoms are due to a sub-periosteal haemorrhage, and
associated with this there may be crepitus from separation of an
photographs show enlargement of the bone, the periosteum being raised
from the shaft and new bone formed in relation to it. Haemorrhages also
occur into the skin, presenting the appearance of bruises, into the
orbit and conjunctiva, and from the mucous membranes.
should have a wet nurse or a plentiful supply of cow's milk in its
juice, and of potatoes bruised down in milk, may be given.
closely allied to rickets, in which the bones of adults become soft and
yielding, so that they are unduly liable to bend or break.
commonly the pelvis and lumbar vertebrae, but sometimes the entire
skeleton. The lime salts are absorbed, the bones lose their rigidity and
bend under the weight of the body and other mechanical influences, with
pelvis, the lumbar spine, and the hip-joints.
_Neuropathic_ forms occur in certain chronic diseases of the brain and
cord; in some cases the bones lose their lime salts and bend, in others
_Osteomalacia associated with New Growths in the Skeleton._--When
readily bend or break, and after death are easily cut with a knife. In
sternum, and bodies of the vertebrae is occupied by a reddish gelatinous
pulp, the structure of which resembles sarcoma; the bones are reduced to
comparatively low temperature (140 o F.), and the coagulum is
re-dissolved on boiling, and it is readily precipitated by hydrochloric
first described by Sir James Paget in 1877. In the early stages, the
functions are exaggerated, and the framework of the bone becomes
of time, however, new bone is formed in great abundance; it is at first
devoid of lime salts, but later becomes calcified, so that the bones
regain their rigidity. This formation of new bone is much in excess of
the normal, the bones become large and bulky, their surfaces rough and
uneven, their texture sclerosed in parts, and the medullary canal is
photographs. The curving of the long bones, which is such a striking
the changes are sometimes remarkably symmetrical (Fig. 135). The bones
forming the cranium may be enormously thickened, the sutures are
obliterated, the distinction into tables and diploe is lost, and, while
the general texture is finely porous, there may be areas as dense as
ivory (Fig. 134).
[Illustration: FIG. 134.--Changes in the Skull resulting from Ostitis
Deformans.
_Clinical Features._--The disease is usually met with in persons over
fifty years of age. It is insidious in its onset, and, the patient's
attention may be first attracted by the occurrence of vague pains in the
back or limbs; by the enlargement and bending of such bones as the tibia
developed, the attitude and general appearance are eminently
and upper part of the spine are bent forwards; the legs are held apart,
slightly flexed at the knees, and are rotated out as well as curved; the
whole appearance suggests that of one of the large anthropoid apes. The
muscles of the limbs may waste to such an extent as to leave the large,
curved, misshapen bones covered only by the skin (Fig. 135). In the
majority of cases the bones of the lower extremities are much earlier
and more severely affected than those of the upper extremity, but the
deformity. In a case observed by Byrom Bramwell, the patient suffered
Lower Limbs resulting from Ostitis Deformans.]
The disease may last for an indefinite period, the general health
remaining long unaffected. In a considerable number of the recorded
cases one of the bones became the seat of sarcoma.
#Osteomyelitis Fibrosa.#--This comparatively rare disease, which was
first described by Recklinghausen, presents many interesting features.
Because of its causing deformities of the bones and an undue liability
to fracture, and being chiefly met with in adolescents, it is regarded
by some authors as a juvenile form of Paget's disease. It may be
the bones of the extremities--or it may be confined to a single bone,
a portion only of the shaft of a long bone and be sharply defined from
the normal bone in contact with it.
disease, the marrow is seen to be replaced by a vascular young
connective tissue which encroaches on the surrounding spongy bone,
the periosteum does not keep pace with the absorption and replacement
going on in the interior, and the cortex may be reduced to a thin shell
connective tissue which replaces the marrow is not unlike that seen in
osteomalacia; it is highly vascular and may show haemorrhages of various
date; there are abundant giant cells of the myeloma type, and
condition.
liquefaction of a solid tumour, such as a myeloma, a chondroma, or even
a sarcoma. Although the tissue elements in this disease resemble those
cortex of the bone, to invade the soft parts, or to give rise to
secondary growths.
attention is usually first directed to it by the occurrence of fracture
of the shaft of one of the long bones--usually the femur--from violence
the great increase in the size of one of the long bones and its uneven
X-rays, by means of which the condition is at once recognised. A
systematic examination of the other long bones will often reveal the
externally.
met with in generalised neuro-fibromatosis. Apart from fracture, the
of bones that have passed through a soft stage and also of those that
have been broken and badly united, but it is difficult to account for
marked curve of the radius in a forearm of which the ulna was quite
straight. The curvature probably resulted from exaggerated growth in
length.
in time, for the condition is chronic and may become stationary, but
according to whether it is progressive or undergoing repair. The shadow
of the bone presents a poor contrast to the soft parts, and no trace of
its original architecture; in extreme cases the shadow of the femur
resembles an unevenly filled sausage (Fig. 137); there is no cortical
clear areas are probably cysts. The condition extends right up to the
_Prognosis._--The condition does not appear to affect the general
health. The future is concerned with the local conditions, and,
especially in the case of the femur, with its liability to fracture; so
far as we know there is no time limit to this.
_Treatment_ is confined to protecting the affected bone--usually the
femur--from injury. Operative treatment may be required for lameness due
to a badly united fracture.
general paralysis of the insane, locomotor ataxia, and other chronic
fractured by forces which would be insufficient to break a healthy bone.
In _locomotor ataxia_ the fractures affect especially the bones of the
symptoms, but they are more often met with in the ataxic stage, when the
causation. They may be unattended with pain, and may fail to unite; when
repair does take place, it is sometimes attended with an excessive
formation of callus. Joint lesions of the nature of Charcot's disease
break when the patient falls in a fit, and there is usually an
exaggerated amount of comminution.
In these affections the bones present no histological or chemical
maintained, therefore, that the disposition to fracture does not depend
upon a fragility of the bone, but on the loss of the muscular sense and
of common sensation in the bones, as a result of which there is an
inability properly to throw the muscles into action and dispose the
limbs so as to place them under the most favourable conditions to meet
external violence.
which an undue fragility of the bones dates from intra-uterine life. It
may occur in several members of the same family. In severe cases,
intra-uterine fractures occur, and during parturition fresh fractures
are almost sure to be produced, so that at birth there is a combination
may remain membranous.
easily broken, the fractures are attended with little or no pain, the
crepitus is soft, and although union may take place, it may be delayed
a child has sustained over a hundred fractures.
The bones show a feeble shadow with the X-rays, and appear thin and
cortex.
In young infants in whom multiple fractures occur the prognosis as to
gradually disappears.
There is symmetrical enlargement and deformity of the hands and feet;
resemble drum-sticks, and the thumb the clapper of a bell. The nails are
convex, and incurved at their free ends, suggesting a resemblance to the
beak of a parrot. There is also enlargement of the lower ends of the
ankle-joints. Skiagrams of the hands and feet show a deposit of new bone
along the shafts of the phalanges.
TUMOURS OF BONE
New growths which originate in the skeleton are spoken of as _primary
tumours_; those which invade the bones, either by metastasis from other
parts of the body or by spread from adjacent tissues, as _secondary_. A
tumour of bone may grow from the cellular elements of the periosteum,
Primary tumours are of the connective-tissue type, and are usually
_Periosteal tumours_ are at first situated on one side of the bone, but
tumours retain the outer fibrous layer as a capsule. Malignant tumours
tend to perforate the periosteal capsule and invade the soft parts.
_Central_ or _medullary tumours_ as they increase in size replace the
like ivory, and the term _ivory exostosis_ is employed. When derived
is known as a _cartilaginous exostosis_. This is invested with a cap of
which may be either sessile or pedunculated, and its surface is smooth
or nodulated (Figs. 138 and 139). A cartilaginous exostosis in the
so-called _exostosis bursata_. The bursa may be derived from the
synovial membrane of the adjacent joint with which its cavity sometimes
Exostoses.]
bone. The symptoms to which it gives rise depend on its situation. In
side of the knee it may incapacitate the patient from riding. When
growing from the dorsum of the terminal phalanx of the great
toe--_subungual exostosis_--it displaces the nail, and may project
through its matrix at the point of the toe, while the soft parts over it
may be ulcerated from pressure (Fig. 107). It incapacitates the patient
and in the external auditory meatus it causes obstruction, which may be
attended with ulceration and discharge. In the skull it may project
from the outer table, forming a smooth rounded swelling, or it may
project from the inner table and press upon the brain.
hardness, and by the shadow which it presents with the X-rays (Fig. 138).
to grow when the skeleton is mature and has no tendency to change its
bones of the skull present greater difficulties; if it is necessary to
[Illustration: FIG. 139.--Multiple Exotoses of both limbs.
(Photograph lent by Sir George T. Beatson.)]
#Multiple Exostoses.#--This disease, which, by custom, is still placed
which is most likely to be at fault (Arthur Keith). The disorder of
bone formed in cartilage comes to be encased in a sheath of bone formed
_diaphysial aclasis_ has been employed by Arthur Keith at the suggestion
of Morley Roberts.
bodies of the vertebrae. Bones formed entirely in membrane, that is,
those of the face and of the cranial vault, are also exempt. The
disorder mainly affects the ossifying junctions of the long bones of the
extremities, the vertebral border of the scapula, and the cristal border
_Clinically_ the disease is attended with the gradual and painless
irregular projections of bone, at the ends of the long bones, the
of cartilage into bone being then completed. While they originate from
the ossifying junctions of the long bones, they tend, as the shaft
may cause symptoms by "locking" the adjacent joint or by pressing upon
nerve-trunks or blood vessels.
In a considerable proportion of cases, the disturbance of growth is
deficient in length but are sometimes also curved and misshapen, which
accounts for the condition being occasionally confused with the
disturbances of growth resulting from rickets. In about one-third of the
recorded cases there is a dislocation of the head of the radius on one
[Illustration: FIG. 140.--Multiple Cartilaginous Exostoses in a
man aet. 27. The scapular tumour projecting above the right clavicle has
brachial plexus.]
In early adult life, one of the tumours, instead of undergoing
ossification, may take on active growth and exhibit the features of a
chondro-sarcoma, pressing injuriously upon adjacent structures (Fig. 140)
The _X-ray appearances_ of the bones affected are of a striking
such as achondroplasia and osteomyelitis fibrosa. The condition is one
that runs in families, sometimes through several generations; we have
more than once seen a father and son together in the hospital
As regards _treatment_, there is no indication for surgical interference
removed by chiselling through its neck.
_Diffuse Osteoma, Leontiasis Ossea._--This rare affection was described
overgrowth first of one and then of both maxillae; these bones are
enlarged in all directions and project on the face, and the nasal fossae
and the maxillary and frontal sinuses become filled up with bone, which
encroaches also on the orbital cavities. In addition to the hideous
and protrusion of the eyes, sometimes followed by loss of sight. The
condition is liable to spread to the zygomatic and frontal bones, the
vault of the skull, and to the mandible. The base of the skull is not
complications or by intercurrent affections. In certain cases it is
A less aggressive form, confined to the maxilla on one side, is
observation, the disfigurement, which was the only subject of complaint,
was removed, after reflecting the soft parts, by paring away the excess
of bone; this is easily done as the bone is spongy, and at an early
stage, imperfectly calcified.
A remarkable form of _unilateral hypertrophy and diffuse osteoma of the
skull_, following the distribution of the fifth nerve, has seen
#Chondroma.#--Cartilaginous tumours, apart from those giving rise to
multiple exostoses, grow from the long bones and from the scapula,
ilium, ribs, or jaws. They usually project from the surface of the bone,
The hyaline cartilage composing the tumour frequently undergoes
semi-fluid jelly, and if this change takes place throughout the tumour
it comes to resemble a cyst. On the other hand, the cartilage may
undergo calcification or ossification. The most important transition of
all is that into sarcoma, the so-called _malignant chondroma_ or
rise to secondary growths, especially in the lungs.
Cases have been met with in which certain parts of the skeleton--only
condition known as multiple cartilaginous exostoses, it is a malignant
disease.
Metacarpals in a boy aet. 10 (cf. Fig. 143).]
common in the bones of the hand, often in a multiple form (Figs. 142 and
softening, or of bony hardness. The skin moves freely over it, except in
relation to the bones of the fingers, where it may become adherent and
ulcerate, simulating the appearance of a malignant tumour. Large tumours
growing from the bones of the extremities may implicate the main
vessels and nerves, either surrounding them or pressing on them.
Portions of a chondroma, which have undergone calcification or
ossification, throw a dark shadow with the X-rays; unaltered cartilage
and myxomatous tissue appear as clear areas.
[Illustration: FIG. 143.--Skiagram of Multiple Chondromas shown
in Fig. 142.]
_Treatment._--It is necessary to remove the whole tumour, and in
chondromas growing from the surface of the bone, especially if they are
pedunculated, this is comparatively easy. When a bone, such as the
tumours the shell of bone is removed over an area sufficient to allow of
the enucleation of the tumour, or the affected portion of bone is
of growth, a tube of radium should be inserted, and in advanced cases
In multiple chondromas of the hand in young subjects, it was formerly
Chondromas springing from the pelvic bones usually arise in the region
of the sacro-iliac joint; they project into the pelvis and press on the
also on the iliac veins, causing oedema of the legs. They are liable to
removal by operation.
#Fibroma# is met with chiefly as a periosteal growth in relation to the
mouth and pharynx, the _simple epulis_ of the alveolar margin and the
_naso-pharyngeal polypus_ being the most common examples. We have met
with a fibroma in the interior of the lower end of the femur of an
adult, causing expansion of the bone with decided increase in girth and
liability to pathological fracture; it is possible that this represents
_Myxoma_, _lipoma_, and _angioma_ of bone are all rare.
#Myeloma.#--The myeloid tumour, which is sometimes classified with the
normally present in the marrow. On section these tumours present a
brownish-red or chocolate colour, and, being highly vascular, are liable
of blood cysts. Sometimes the arterial vessels are so dilated as to
or "expansion" of the bone results in the cortex being represented by a
egg-shell crackling.
The myeloma is most often met with between the ages of twenty-five and
forty in the upper end of the tibia or lower end of the femur. It grows
slowly and causes little pain, and may long escape recognition unless an
examination is made with the X-rays. Although these tumours have been
to be treated as such. When located in the shaft of a long bone,
pathological fracture is liable to occur.
myeloma is made with the aid of the X-rays: the typical appearance is
that of a rounded or oval clear area bounded by a shell of bone of
diminishing thickness (Fig. 145). The inflammatory lesions at the ends
(Mr. J. W. Struthers' case.)]
_Treatment._--In early cases the cortex is opened up to give free access
to the tumour tissue, which is scraped out with the spoon. Bloodgood
alcohol; a rod of bone is inserted to fill the gap. In advanced cases
the segment of bone is resected and a portion of the tibia or fibula
(Bence-Jones) is referred to on p. 474. Myeloma occurs in the jaws,
#Sarcoma# and #endothelioma# are the commonest tumours of bone, and
Structurally, two main groups may be differentiated: (1) the soft,
fibrous tissue, cartilage, or bone.
cells; they grow from the marrow of the spongy ends or from the
vertebrae, and jaws. As they grow they may cause little alteration in the
pathological fracture is a frequent result. The small round-celled
sarcomas are among the most malignant tumours of bone, growing with
great rapidity, and at an early stage giving rise to secondary growths.
(2) The second group includes the _fibro-_, _osteo-_, and
_chondro-sarcomas_, and combinations of these; in all of them fully
cellular elements. They grow chiefly from the deeper layer of the
tend to surround the bone (Fig. 150), and to invade its interior,
flat bones of the skull they may traverse the diploe and erupt on the
parts of the tumour, spicules, needles, and plates, often exhibiting a
fan-like arrangement (Fig. 151). The peripheral portion consists of soft
sarcomatous tissue, which invades the overlying soft parts. The
met with most often in the femur and tibia, less frequently in the
humerus, skull, pelvis, and jaws. In the long bones it may grow from the
shaft, while the chondro-sarcoma more often originates at the
extremities. Sometimes they are multiple, several tumours appearing
[Illustration: FIG. 147.--Periosteal Sarcoma of Humerus, after
thirty, and is comparatively common in children. Males suffer oftener
than females, in the proportion of two to one.
In _periosteal sarcoma_ the presence of a swelling is usually the first
it occurs near the end of a long bone the limb frequently assumes a
[Illustration: FIG. 148.--Chondro-Sarcoma of Scapula in a man aet. 63;
death.]
In _central sarcoma_ pain is the first symptom, and it is usually
densely hard, but in time there may be parchment-like or egg-shell
crackling from yielding of the thin shell. The swelling may pulsate, and
a bruit may be heard over it. In advanced cases it may be impossible to
differentiate between a periosteal and a central tumour, either
clinically or after the specimen has been laid open.
Pathological fracture is more common in central tumours, and sometimes
formation of cartilaginous callus.
(Museum of Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh.)]
network is evident through the skin. Elevation of the temperature over
the tumour, which may amount to two degrees or more, is a point of
diagnostic significance, as it suggests an inflammatory lesion.
The adjacent joint usually remains intact, although its movements may be
impaired by the bulk of the tumour or by effusion into the cavity.
Enlargement of the neighbouring lymph glands does not necessarily imply
that they have become infected with sarcoma for the enlargement may
glands, however, does sometimes occur, and in them the histological
structure of the parent tumour is reproduced.
To obtain a reasonable prospect of cure, the _diagnosis_ must be made at
an early stage. Great reliance is to be placed on information gained by
examination with the X-rays.
[Illustration: FIG. 151.--Radiogram of Osteo-Sarcoma of Upper Third
_X-ray Appearances._--In periosteal tumours that do not ossify, there is
caries; in ossifying tumours, the arrangement of the new bone on the
surface is characteristic, and when it takes the form of spicules at
right angles to the shaft, it is pathognomic.
In soft central tumours, there is disappearance of bone shadow in the
area of the tumour, while above and below or around this, the shadow is
is a considerable amount of imperfectly formed new bone, this gives a
shadow which barely replaces that of the original bone, in parts it may
joint.
Humerus in a woman aet. 29.]
Skiagraphy is not only of assistance in differentiating new growths from
other diseases of bone, but may also yield information as to the
its treatment by operation.
When fracture of a long bone takes place in an adolescent or young adult
from comparatively slight violence, disease of the bone should be
In difficult cases the final appeal is to exploratory incision and
microscopical examination of a portion of the tumour; this should be
done when the major operation has been arranged for, the surgeon waiting
until the examination is completed.
periosteal tumours are less favourable than central ones, because they
practice has been to perform amputation well above the growth, and this
may still be recommended as a routine procedure. There are reasons,
unnecessary in the more benign sarcomas, and in the more malignant forms
is usually unavailing to prevent a fatal issue either from local
recurrence or from metastases in the lungs or elsewhere. Following
obtained by resecting the portion of bone which is the seat of the
tumour, and substituting for it a corresponding portion from the tibia
boy we resected the shaft and inserted his fibula ten years ago, and he
shows no sign of recurrence. When resection is impracticable, a
subcapsular enucleation is performed, followed by the insertion of
radium.
endothelioma, or myeloma. The tumour tissue largely disappears, while
varying thickness. The most common seats of the condition are the lower
pelvis.
The _clinical features_ are those of a pulsating tumour of slow
may be revealed by the presence of egg-shell crackling, and by
If the condition is believed to be innocent, the treatment is the same
#Secondary Tumours of Bone.#--These embrace two groups of new growth,
those which spread to bone by direct continuity.
metastases by lymphatic permeation (Handley), the common metastases
blood-stream.
Secondary cancer is a comparatively common disease, and, as in
metastases in other tissues, the secondary growths resemble the parent
tumour. The soft forms grow rapidly, and eat away the bone, without
considerable formation of imperfectly formed bone, often deficient in
lime salts; this condition may be widely diffused throughout the
bones, it is known as _cancerous osteomalacia_. Secondary cancer of bone
is attended with pain, or it suddenly attracts notice by the occurrence
other hand, the disease may show itself clinically as a tumour of bone,
unless the existence of the primary cancer is discovered.
the breast, liver, uterus, prostate, colon, and rectum; hyper-nephroma
of the kidney may also give rise to metastases in bone.
mention, because they are peculiar in that neither the primary growth in
_Secondary sarcoma_, whether derived from a primary growth in the bone
or in the soft parts, is much rarer than secondary cancer. Its removal
terminating fatally in which the _section_ revealed only one metastasis,
In all of these conditions, examination of the bones with the X-rays
gives valuable information and often disclose unsuspected metastases.
_Cancer of Bone resulting from Direct Extension from Soft Parts._--In
tongue, gums, antrum, frontal sinus, auditory meatus, or middle ear.
They will be described under these special regions.
The second type is met with in relation to _epithelioma occurring in a
sinus_, the sequel of suppurative osteomyelitis, compound fracture, or
a great number of years: we have known it to last as many as fifty. The
epithelioma originates at the skin orifice of the sinus, and spreads to
resisted by dense bone, which obliterates the medullary canal. Although
characteristic cauliflower growth at the orifice of the sinus, and by
the offensive nature of the discharge. A similar epithelioma may arise
in connection with a _chronic ulcer of the leg_. The cancer may infect
the femoral lymph glands. The operative treatment is influenced by the
in wide removal of the diseased tissues and resection of the bone, or in
amputation.
interior of bone are the result of the liquefaction of solid tissue;
this may be that of chondroma, myeloma, or sarcoma, but more commonly of
CHAPTER XXI
DISEASES OF JOINTS
Definition of terms--Ankylosis. DISEASES: Errors of
    development--Bacterial diseases: _Pyogenic_; _Gonorrhoeal_;
    _Tuberculous_; _Syphilitic_; _Acute rheumatism_--Diseases
    associated with certain constitutional conditions: _Gout_; _Chronic
    _Haemophilia_--Diseases associated with affections of the nervous
    system: _Neuro-arthropathies_; _Charcot's disease_--Hysterical or
    mimetic affections of joints--Tumours and cysts--Loose bodies.
which affects the synovial membrane of a joint. It is usually associated
purulent. As the term synovitis merely refers to the tissue involved, it
should always be used with an adjective--such as gouty, gonorrhoeal, or
tuberculous--which indicates its pathological nature.
The terms _hydrops_, _hydrarthrosis_, and _chronic serous synovitis_ are
disease--for example, in the knee-joint from repeated sprains, or when
chronic forms of synovitis which result from gonorrhoea, tuberculosis,
_Arthritis_ is the term applied when not only the synovial membrane but
the articular surfaces, and it may be also the ends of the bones, are
involved, and it is necessary to prefix a qualifying adjective which
indicates its nature. When effusion is present, it may be serous, as in
arthritis deformans, or sero-fibrinous or purulent, as in certain forms
accompaniment of arthritis. On account of the involvement of the
the joint contains pus. This is observed chiefly in chronic disease of
pyogenic or tuberculous origin, and is usually attended with the
formation of abscesses outside the joint.
common accompaniments of the more serious and progressive forms of joint
disease, especially those of bacterial origin. The destruction of
subjacent bone. When the disease begins as a synovitis, the synovial
and eats into it, causing defects or holes which are spoken of as
into granulation tissue, which eats into the cartilage and separates it
from the bone. Following on the destruction of the cartilage, the
articular surface of the bone undergoes disintegration, a condition
spoken of as _caries of the articular surface_. The occurrence of
ulceration of cartilage and of articular caries is attended with the
contraction, wasting of muscles, and starting pains. These _starting
pains_ are the result of sudden involuntary movements of the joint. They
occur most frequently as the patient is dropping off to sleep; the
muscles becoming relaxed, the sensitive ulcerated surfaces jar on one
another, which causes sudden reflex contraction of the muscles, and the
with a start. Advanced articular caries is usually associated with some
feel the bony surfaces grate upon one another. When all its constituent
Should recovery take place, repair is usually attended with union of the
opposing articular surfaces either by fibrous tissue or by bone.
#Conditions of Impaired Mobility of Joints.#--There are four conditions
of impaired mobility in joints: rigidity, contracture, ankylosis, and
locking. _Rigidity_ is the fixation of a joint by involuntary
deep-seated joints, such as the hip. It disappears under anaesthesia.
ligaments, fasciae, or skin. As the structures on the flexor aspect are
associated with flexion. Contracture may result from disease of the
joint, or from conditions outside it--for example, disease in one of
the adjacent bones, or lesions of the nerves.
contracture. Three anatomical varieties of ankylosis are
the opposing surfaces, which may be in the form of loose isolated bands
of fibrous tissue, or may bind the bones so closely together as to
varies from a mere restriction of the normal range of movement, up to a
close union of the bones which prevents movement. Fibrous ankylosis may
ankylosis_ implies the fusion of two apposed cartilaginous surfaces. It
femur in tuberculous disease of the knee. The fusion of the
connective tissue, derived from the synovial membrane, over the
articular cartilage. Clinically, it is associated with absolute
articular surfaces which have lost their cartilage and become covered
with granulations. In the majority of cases it is to be regarded as a
[Illustration: FIG. 154.--Osseous Ankylosis of Femur and Tibia in
The term _arthritis ossificans_ has been applied by Joseph Griffiths to
The occurrence of ankylosis in a joint before the skeleton has attained
maturity does not appear to impair the growth in length of the bones
junctions caused by the original disease.
To differentiate by manipulation between muscular fixation and
ankylosis, it may be necessary to anaesthetise the patient. The nature
and extent of ankylosis may be learned by skiagraphy; in osseous
ankylosis the shadow of the two bones is a continuous one. In fibrous as
only to a limited extent; while in osseous ankylosis the joint is
[Illustration: FIG. 155.--Osseous Ankylosis of Knee in the flexed
position following upon Tuberculous Arthritis.
The _treatment_ is influenced by the nature of the original lesion, the
variety of the ankylosis, and the attitude of the joint. When there is
or ruptured. Elongation of the adhesions may be effected by
manipulations, exercises, and the use of special forms of
apparatus--such as the application of weights to the limb. It may be
of such risks as fracture of the bone--which is often rarefied--or
separation of an epiphysis. There is also the risk of fat embolism, and
of re-starting the original disease. The giving way of adhesions may be
for some days before exercises and manipulations can be resumed.
_Operative treatment_ may be called for in cases in which the bones are
bones a flap of fat-bearing tissue, from which a bursal cavity lined
formed.
Arthroplasty is most successful in ankylosis following upon injury; when
the ankylosis results from some infective condition such as tuberculosis
or gonorrhoea, it is liable to result in failure either because of a
of periosteum and capsular ligament, is resected to allow of the
formation of a false joint.
When bony ankylosis has occurred with the joint in an undesirable
remedied by osteotomy or by a wedge-shaped resection of the bone, with
or without such additional division of the contracted soft parts as will
flail-like.
_Locking._--A joint is said to lock when its movements are abruptly
is best illustrated in arthritis deformans of the hip in which new bone
formed round the rim of the acetabulum mechanically arrests the
excursions of the head of the femur. The new bone, which limits the
movements, is readily demonstrated in skiagrams; it may be removed by
operative means. Locking of joints is more often met with as a result of
In certain injuries of the semilunar menisci of the knee, also, the
joint is liable to a variety of locking, which differs, however, in many
other deformities of intra-uterine origin, such as abnormal laxity of
the essential constituents of a joint. The more important of these are
described along with the surgery of the Extremities.
carried to the joint in the blood-stream, and they lodge either in the
subsequently spreads to the other structures of the joint. Organisms may
experimentally that joints are among the most susceptible parts of the
character of the synovial fluid, which protects organisms from
PYOGENIC DISEASES
The commoner pyogenic diseases are the result of infection of one or
which may be demonstrated in the exudate in the joint and in the
frequently from the mucous membrane of the pharynx (J. B. Murphy). The
injury, exposure to cold, antecedent disease of the joint, or other
factors, the nature of which is not always apparent.
The effects on the joint vary in severity. In the milder forms, there is
into the cavity of the joint of serous fluid mixed with flakes of
fibrin--_serous synovitis_. In more severe infections the exudate
corpuscles--_purulent_ or _suppurative synovitis_; the synovial membrane
and the ligaments are softened, and the surface of the membrane presents
granulations resembling those on an ulcer; foci of suppuration may
presents a worm-eaten or ulcerated appearance, or it may undergo
disintegration of the osseous trabeculae--_caries_. With the destruction
of the ligaments, the stability of the joint is lost, and it becomes
disorganised.
The _clinical features_ vary with the extent of the infection. When
this is confined to the synovial and peri-synovial tissues--_acute
serous_ and _purulent synovitis_--there is the usual general reaction,
swollen, the swelling assuming the shape of the distended synovial sac,
fluctuation can usually be elicited, and the joint is held in the flexed
position.
of the swollen condition of the limb, and because there are already
symptoms of toxaemia. We have observed a case in which both the hip and
knee joints were infected from the cellular tissue.
temperature rises quickly, often with a rigor, and remains high; the
patient looks ill, and is either unable to sleep or the sleep is
disturbed by starting pains. The joint is held rigid in the flexed
position, and the least attempt at movement causes severe pain; the
is hot, tensely distended, and there may be oedema of the peri-articular
capsule, there are signs of abscess or of diffuse suppuration in the
cellular tissue. The final disorganisation of the joint is indicated by
spontaneous displacement of the bones, and this may amount to
may be separated and displaced.
features are similar to those observed when the infection has reached
the joint by the blood-stream, but the destructive changes tend to be
more severe and are more likely to result in disorganisation.
the rule, with more or less complete restoration of function. In more
severe forms the joint may be permanently damaged as a result of fibrous
or bony ankylosis, or from displacement or dislocation. From changes in
other of the adjacent bones. In the most severe forms, and especially
when several joints are involved, death may result from toxaemia.
The _treatment_ is carried out on the same principles as in other
pyogenic infections. The limb is immobilised in such an attitude that
should stiffness occur there will be the least interference with
function. Extension by weight and pulley is the most valuable means of
allaying muscular spasm and relieving intra-articular tension and of
counteracting the tendency to flexion; as much as 15 or 20 pounds may be
The induction of hyperaemia is sometimes remarkably efficacious in
fluid in the joint is in sufficient quantity to cause tension, if it
in glycerin are injected and the wound is closed. In virulent infections
the injection may be repeated in twenty-four hours. Drainage by tube or
otherwise is to be condemned (Murphy). A vaccine may be prepared from
the fluid in the joint and injected into the subcutaneous cellular
tissue.
stiffness and deformity by movements and massage, and the use of hot-air
measures may be required for deformity or ankylosis.
#Metastatic Forms of Pyogenic Infection#
In #pyaemia#, one or more joints may fill with pus without marked
often recovers without impairment of function.
In #typhoid fever#, joint lesions result from infection with the typhoid
with or without suppuration; there is again a remarkable absence of
Joint lesions are comparatively common in #scarlet fever#, and were
type is that of a serous synovitis, occurring within a week or ten days
from the onset of the fever. Its favourite seat is in the hand and
wrist, the sheaths of the extensor tendons as well as the synovial
membrane of the joints being involved. It does not tend to migrate to
other joints, and rarely lasts longer than a few days. It is probably
throat lesion is severe, an arthritis is sometimes observed that is
believed to be a metastasis from the throat; it may be acute and
The joints of the lower extremity are especially apt to suffer; the
child is seriously ill, is delirious at night, develops bed-sores over
legs are allowed to assume contracture deformities with ankylosis or
child survive, the degree of crippling may be pitiable in the extreme;
capacity of locomotion.
#Pneumococcal affections of joints#, the result of infection with the
membrane and effusion of serum or pus, to an _acute arthritis_ with
erosion of cartilage, caries of the articular surfaces, and
disorganisation of the joint. The knee is most frequently affected, but
several joints may suffer at the same time. In most cases the joint
affection makes its appearance a few days after the commencement of a
pneumonia, but in a number of instances, especially among children, the
lung is not specially involved, and the condition is an indication of a
fatal termination. The differential diagnosis from other forms of
fluid withdrawn from the joint. The treatment is carried out on the same
lines as in other pyogenic infections, considerable reliance being
In #measles#, #diphtheria#, #smallpox#, #influenza#, and #dysentery#,
similar joint lesions may occur.
The joint lesions which accompany #acute rheumatism# or "rheumatic
fever" are believed to be due to a diplococcus. In the course of a
some of the larger joints, and not infrequently the smaller ones also,
helpless, dreading the slightest movement. From day to day fresh joints
rapidity. Affections of the heart-valves and of the pericardium are
that the joints have entirely recovered, but in a small proportion of
described under chronic rheumatism. There is no call for operative
interference.
#Gonococcal Affections of Joints.#--These include all forms of joint
lesion occurring in association with gonorrhoeal urethritis,
vulvo-vaginitis, or gonorrhoeal ophthalmia. They may develop at any stage
of the urethritis, but are most frequently met with from the eighteenth
to the twenty-second day after the primary infection, when the organisms
have reached the posterior urethra; they have been observed, however,
As a complication of ophthalmia, the joint lesions are met with in
the third week.
The gonococcus is carried to the joint in the blood-stream and is first
deposited in the synovial membrane, in the tissues of which it can
usually be found; it may be impossible to find it in the exudate within
the joint. The joint lesions may be the only evidence of metastasis, or
they may be part of a general infection involving the endocardium,
pleura, and tendon sheaths.
Several clinical types are differentiated. (1) A _dry poly-arthritis_
met with in the joints and tendon sheaths of the wrist and hand,
formerly described as gonorrhoeal rheumatism, which in some cases is
trifling and evanescent, and in others is persistent and progressive,
and results in stiffness of the affected joints and permanent crippling
of the hand and fingers.
(2) The commonest type is a _chronic synovitis_ or _hydrops_, in which
the joint--very often the knee--becomes filled with a serous or
membrane, cellular tissue, or skin, nor is there any fever or
disturbance of health. The movements are free except in so far as they
(3) An _acute synovitis_ with peri-articular phlegmon is most often met
with in the elbow, but it occurs also in the knee and ankle. There is a
causes pain, and the part is sensitive to touch. The skin is hot and
tense, and in the case of the elbow may be red and fiery as in
erysipelas.
surfaces may lead to the formation of adhesions, sometimes in the form
(4) A _suppurative arthritis_, like that caused by ordinary pus
microbes, may be the result of gonococcal infection alone or of a mixed
infection. Usually only one joint is affected, but the condition may be
are covered with granulations, extra-articular abscesses form, and
not suspected.
confined to one or two joints, has little tendency to wander from joint
although these drugs may relieve pain. The conclusive point is the
recognition of a gonorrhoeal discharge or of threads in the urine.
The disease may persist or may relapse, and the patient may be laid up
for weeks or months, and may finally be crippled in one or in several
joints.
The _treatment_--besides that of the urethral disease or of the
ophthalmia--consists in rest until all pain and sensitiveness have
may be withdrawn by a needle and syringe. Detoxicated vaccines should be
Murphy has found benefit from the introduction into the joint, in the
in glycerin. This may be repeated within a week, the patient being kept
in bed with light weight extension. In the chronic hydrops the fluid is
withdrawn, and about an ounce of a 1 per cent. solution of protargol
injected; the patient should be warned of the marked reaction which
follows.
exciting relapse or metastasis, the joint is massaged and exercised.
TUBERCULOUS DISEASE
the arteries. The disease may commence in the synovial membrane or in
these two seats of infection has been the subject of considerable
difference of opinion. The traditional view of Konig is that in the knee
and most of the larger joints the disease arises in the bone and in the
number of cases beginning in the bones is about five times greater than
that originating in the membrane. This estimate, so far as the actual
frequency of bone lesions is concerned, has been generally accepted, but
recent observers, notably John Fraser, do not accept the presence of
bone lesions as necessarily proving that the disease commenced in the
bones; he maintains, and we think with good grounds, that in many cases
the disease having commenced in the synovial membrane, slowly spreads to
the bone by way of the blood vessels and lymphatics, and gives rise to
lesions in the marrow.
bone may give rise to _reactive changes_ in the adjacent joint,
characterised by effusion and by the extension of the synovial membrane
over the articular surfaces. This may result in the formation of
necessarily due to actual tuberculous infection of the joint.
bone may take place at the periphery, the osseous focus reaching the
the membrane. Or it may take place in the central area, by the
projection of tuberculous granulation tissue into the joint following
[Illustration: FIG. 156.--Section of Upper End of Fibula, showing
caseating focus in marrow, erupting on articular surface and infecting
_Changes in the Synovial Membrane._--In the majority of cases there is a
formed connective or fibrous tissue, the inner of embryonic tissue,
usually permeated with miliary tubercles. On opening the joint, these
tubercles may be seen on the surface of the membrane, or the surface may
be covered with a layer of fibrinous or caseating tissue. Where there is
greater resistance on the part of the tissues, there is active formation
of young connective tissue which circumscribes or encapsulates the
membrane, and are only seen on cutting into it.
The thickened synovial membrane is projected into the cavity of the
joint, filling up its pouches and recesses, and spreading over the
surface of the articular cartilage "like ivy growing on a wall."
fibrous adhesions form between the opposing articular surfaces, or it
may progress, in which case further changes occur, resulting in
destruction of the articular cartilage and exposure of the subjacent
bone.
In rare instances the synovial membrane presents nodular masses or
give rise to the symptoms of loose body. The fringes of synovial
membrane may also undergo a remarkable development, like that observed
in arthritis deformans, and described as arborescent lipoma. Both these
types are almost exclusively met with in the knee.
synovial tuberculosis the joint is entirely filled up by the diffuse
abundant serous exudate, and with this there may be a considerable
assume the shape of melon-seed bodies. More rarely the joint contains
_Ulceration and Necrosis of Cartilage._--The synovial tissue covering
the cartilage causes pitting and perforation of the cartilage and makes
subjacent bone; the cartilage may be detached in portions of
of disease in the bone.
_Caries of Articular Surfaces._--Tuberculous infiltration of the marrow
in the surface cancelli breaks up the spongy framework of the bone into
minute irregular fragments, so that it disintegrates or crumbles
condition is called _caries sicca_.
The pressure of the articular surfaces against one another favours the
processes are usually more advanced in the areas most exposed to
head of the femur, and on the posterior and upper segment of the
acetabulum.
The occurrence of _pathological dislocation_ is due to softening and
stretching of the ligaments which normally retain the bones in position,
dislocation is also favoured by destructive changes in the bones.
_Peri-articular tubercle and abscess_ may result from the spread of
disease from the bone or joint into the surrounding tissues, either
directly or by way of the lymphatics. A peri-articular abscess may
bursae, and finally reaching the skin surface by tortuous sinuses.
Reactive changes in the vicinity of tuberculous joints are of common
occurrence, and play a considerable part in the production of what is
peri-articular fat and between muscles and tendons. It may be tough and
fibrous, or soft, vascular, and oedematous, and the peri-articular fat
becomes swollen and gelatinous, constituting a layer of considerable
thickness. The fat disappears and is replaced by a mucoid effusion
between the fibrous bundles of connective tissue. This is what was
formerly known as _gelatinous degeneration_ of the synovial membrane. In
the case of the wrist the newly formed connective tissue may fix the
in the formation of spicules of new bone on the periosteal surfaces and
met with where pyogenic infection has been superadded.
_Terminations and Sequelae._--A natural process of cure may occur at any
ankylosis, or contracture of the peri-articular structures. Caseous foci
later date. Interference with growth is comparatively common, and may
in adults who have suffered from severe disease of the hip in
childhood--the entire limb, including the foot, being shorter and
smaller than the corresponding parts of the opposite side.
Atrophic conditions are also met with, the bones undergoing fatty
atrophy, so that in extreme cases they may be cut with a knife or be
easily fractured. These atrophic conditions are most marked in bedridden
patients, and are largely due to disuse of the limb; they are recovered
#Clinical Features.#--These vary with the different anatomical forms of
the disease, and with the joint affected.
pains in several joints--described by John Duncan as _tuberculous
complications; and no benefit follows the administration of salicylates.
In exceptional cases, tuberculous joint disease follows an acute course
resembling that of the pyogenic arthritis of infants. This has been
joint. If promptly treated by incision and drainage, recovery is rapid,
and free movement of the joint, may be preserved.
The onset and early stages of tuberculous disease, however, are more
may have obtained a considerable hold before it attracts notice. It is
injury, as it often first attracts attention after some slight trauma or
weakness, tiredness, stiffness, and inability to use the limb, these
symptoms improving with rest and being aggravated by exertion.
It is rarely possible by external examination to recognise deep-seated
osseous foci in the vicinity of joints; but if they are near the surface
in a superficial bone--such as the head of the tibia--there may be local
and on percussion.
caseous foci in the marrow of the adjacent bone show as clear areas with
contour, and a clear interval between it and the surrounding bone.
Caries of the articular surface imparts a woolly appearance or irregular
bone. In bony ankylosis the shadow of the two bones is a continuous one,
appreciated on comparison with the normal joint of the other limb.
_Wasting of muscles_ is a constant accompaniment of tuberculous joint
disease. It is to be attributed partly to want of use, but chiefly to
muscles become soft and flaccid, they exhibit tremors on attempted
movement, and their excitability to the faradic current is diminished.
diagnostic signs, particularly in deeply seated joints such as the
shoulder, hip, and spine. It is due to a protective contraction of the
fixation disappears under anaesthesia.
assumed in disease of the hip. They are due to reflex or involuntary
placing it in the attitude of greatest ease; they also disappear under
anaesthesia. With the lapse of time they not only become exaggerated, but
may become permanent from ankylosis or from contracture of the soft
parts round the joint.
_The formation of extra-articular abscess_ may take place early, or it
may not occur till long after the disease has subsided. The abscess may
develop so insidiously that it does not attract attention until it has
attained considerable size, especially when associated with disease of
different joints is fairly constant and is determined by the anatomical
relationships of the capsule and synovial membrane to the surrounding
tissues. The bursae and tendon sheaths in the vicinity may influence the
infected with pyogenic bacteria, there is not only the risk of
The sinuses may be so tortuous that a probe cannot be passed to the
demonstrated by injecting the sinuses with an emulsion of bismuth and
taking X-ray photographs.
Tuberculous infection of the lymph glands of the limb is exceptional,
but may follow upon infection of the skin around the orifice of a sinus.
A slight rise of temperature in the evening may be induced in quiescent
joint lesions by injury or by movement of the joint under anaesthesia, or
by the fatigue of a railway journey. When sinuses have formed and become
infected with pyogenic bacteria, there may be a diurnal variation in the
_Relative Frequency of Tuberculous Disease in Different
Joints._--Hospital statistics show that joints are affected in the
following order of frequency: Spine, knee, hip, ankle and tarsus, elbow,
wrist, shoulder. The hip and spine are most often affected in childhood
and youth, the shoulder and wrist in adults; the knee, ankle, and elbow
show little age preference.
_Clinical Variations of Tuberculous Joint Disease._--The above
description applies to tuberculous joint disease in general; it must be
modified to include special manifestations or varieties.
When the main incidence of the infection affects the synovial membrane,
the clinical picture may assume the form of a _hydrops_, or of an
_empyema_ in which the joint is filled with pus. More common than either
as the knee, ankle, elbow, and wrist. The swelling, which is the first
and most prominent clinical feature, develops gradually and painlessly,
obliterating the bony prominences by filling up the natural hollows. It
appears greater to the eye than is borne out by measurement, being
part of the patient, because the articular surfaces and ligaments are
still intact. There may be a feeling of weight in the limb, and in the
case of the knee and ankle the patient tires on walking and drags the
exertion, but, for a time at least, it improves under rest.
If the disease is not arrested, there follow the symptoms and signs of
Health._--Experience shows that the early stages of tuberculous joint
disease are compatible with the appearance of good health. As a rule,
however, and especially if there is mixed infection, the health suffers,
local measures are employed. These may be described under two heads--the
conservative and the operative.
_Conservative treatment_ is almost always to be employed in the first
smaller mortality and with better functional results than by operation.
_Treatment by rest_ implies the immobilisation of the diseased limb
limb is immobilised should be that in which, in the event of subsequent
may be secured by bandages, splints, extension, or other apparatus.
relieves pain and startings at night, and prevents abnormal attitudes of
the limb. If, when the patient first comes under observation, the limb
is in a deformed attitude which does not readily yield to extension, the
_The induction of hyperaemia_ is often helpful, the rubber bandage or the
hot-air chamber being employed for an hour or so morning and evening.
_Injection of Iodoform._--This is carried out on the same lines as have
joint are withdrawn, the iodoform is injected; and this may require to
be repeated in a month or six weeks.
After the injection of iodoform there is usually considerable reaction,
attended with fever (101 o F.), headache, and malaise, and considerable
diminishes with each subsequent injection.
has largely gone out of fashion, but the cautery may still be employed
The application of the X-rays has proved beneficial in synovial lesions
are made at fortnightly intervals, and on account of the cicatricial
contraction which attends upon recovery, the joint must be kept in good
position.
Conservative treatment is only abandoned if improvement does not show
itself after a thorough trial, or if the disease relapses after apparent
cure.
_Operative Treatment._--Other things being equal, operation is more
often indicated in adults than in children, because after the age of
twenty there is less prospect of recovery under conservative treatment,
internal organs, and there is no fear of interfering with the growth of
patient must also be taken into account; the bread-winner, under
existing social conditions, may be unable to give up his work for a
The _local conditions_ which decide for or against operation are
general terms that operative interference is indicated in cases in which
the disease continues to progress in spite of a fair trial of
treatment--that is to say, where there are severe bone lesions.
Operative interference is indicated also when the functional result will
be better than that likely to be obtained by conservative measures, as
In many cases the extent of the operation can only be decided after
exploration. The aim is to remove all the disease with the least
more open the method of operating the better, so that all parts of the
joint may be available for inspection. The methods of Kocher, which
sound, and if a movable joint is aimed at, they may be left; but if
ankylosis is desired, they must be removed. Localised disease of the
cartilage should be removed with the spoon or gouge, and the bone
a thin slice of bone should be removed, and if foci in the marrow are
then revealed, it is better to gouge them out than to remove further
disease has almost entirely replaced reduction by force; the contracted
soft parts are divided, and the bone is resected.
_Amputation_ for tuberculous joint disease has become one of the rare
operations of surgery, and is only justified when less radical measures
have failed and the condition of the limb is affecting the general
SYPHILITIC DISEASE
Syphilitic affections of joints are comparatively rare. As in
tuberculosis, the disease may be first located in the synovial membrane,
or it may spread to the joint from one of the bones.
appear, one of the large joints, such as the shoulder or knee, may be
the seat of pain--_arthralgia_--which is worse at night. In the
secondary stage, a _synovitis_ with serous effusion is not uncommon, and
may affect several joints. Syphilitic _hydrops_ is met with almost
its onset and progress, the patient usually being able to go about.
In the _tertiary stage_ the joint lesions are persistent and
destructive, and result from the formation of gummata, either in the
deeper layers of the synovial membrane or in the adjacent bone or
the knee-joint of middle-aged adults, especially women. They are usually
multiple, develop slowly, and are rarely sensitive or painful. One or
more of the gummata may break down and give rise to tertiary ulcers. The
vicinity of the knee is characteristic of tertiary syphilis.
which eats into and replaces the articular cartilage. Clinically, the
condition resembles tuberculous disease of the synovial membrane, for
affection the swelling is nodular and uneven, and the subjective
symptoms are slight, mobility is little impaired, and yet the deformity
is considerable.
_Syphilitic osteo-arthritis_ results from a gumma in the periosteum or
of the bones, the patient complains of pains, which are worst at night.
The disease may extend to the synovial membrane and be attended with
effusion into the joint, or it may erupt on the periosteal surface and
invade the skin, forming one or more sinuses. The further progress is
complicated by the occurrence of pyogenic infection leading to necrosis
anti-syphilitic treatment must be supplemented by operation for the
removal of the diseased tissues. In the knee, excision is rarely
necessary; but in the elbow it may be called for to obtain a movable
In #inherited syphilis# the earliest joint affections are those in which
in exceptional cases pyogenic infection may be superadded, and pus form
in the joint.
striking features are: its insidious development, its chronic course,
symmetrical distribution, freedom from pain, the free mobility of the
joint, its tendency to relapse, and its association with other
syphilitic stigmata, especially in the eyes. The knees are the joints
anti-syphilitic treatment without impairment of function.
JOINT DISEASES ACCOMPANYING CERTAIN CONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS
#Gout.#--_Arthritis Urica._--One of the manifestations of gout is that
loses its vitality and crumbles away, leading to the formation of what
are known as gouty ulcers, and these may extend through the cartilage
and invade the bone. The deposit of urates in the synovial membrane is
attended with effusion into the joint and the formation of adhesions,
formation of scar tissue. The metatarso-phalangeal joint of the great
toe, on one or on both sides, is that most frequently affected. The
disease is met with in men after middle life, and while common enough in
excruciating pain, usually during the early hours of the morning, the
attacks may recur only once a year or they may be more frequent; the
local phenomena persist, the joint remaining permanently swollen and
stiff. Masses of chalk form in and around the joint, and those in the
subcutaneous tissue may break through the skin, forming indolent ulcers
are affected; the crippling resembles that resulting from arthritis
deformans but it differs in not being symmetrical.
Bier's bandage for two or three hours twice daily while the symptoms are
membranes, and manifesting other evidence of the rheumatic taint, such
encroaches on the cavity of the joint and gives rise to adhesions, and
may subsequently be transformed into connective tissue, with consequent
only in so far as they undergo fatty atrophy from disuse of the limb, or
Osseous ankylosis may occur, especially in the small joints of the hand
The disease is generally poly-articular and may be met with in childhood
the patient resists the least attempt at movement. In others, the
When there is much connective tissue formed in relation to the synovial
below, the swelling is spindle-shaped. Subacute exacerbations occur from
time to time, with fever and aggravation of the local symptoms and
uncertain.
palliative. Salicylates are only of service during the exacerbations
attended with pyrexia. The application of soda fomentations, turpentine
result from the general and local therapeutics available at such places
as Bath, Buxton, Harrogate, Strathpeffer, Wiesbaden, or Aix. In selected
cases, a certain measure of success has followed operative interference,
which consists in a modified excision. The deformities resulting from
chronic rheumatism are but little amenable to surgical treatment, and
forcible attempts to remedy stiffness or deformity are to be avoided.
#Arthritis Deformans# (_Osteo-arthritis, Rheumatoid Arthritis, Rheumatic
Gout, Malum Senile, Traumatic or Mechanical Arthritis_).--Under the term
arthritis deformans, which was first employed by Virchow, it is
anatomical and clinical features in common.
domestic species and in wild animals in the natural state such as the
larger carnivora and the gorilla; evidence of it has also been found in
atrophy and degeneration on the one hand and overgrowth on the other,
indicating a profound disturbance of nutrition in the joint structures.
The nature of this disturbance and its etiology are imperfectly known.
By many writers it is believed to depend upon some form of
an "arthritic diathesis."
by several factors, of which trauma appears to be the most important.
of one of the neighbouring bones. It occurs with greater frequency after
repeated minor injuries affecting the joint and its vicinity, such as
The traumatic or strain factor in the production of the disease may be
manifested in a less obvious fashion. In the lower extremity, for
limb as a whole_ would appear to predispose to the disease in one or
other of the joints. The static equilibrium may be disturbed by such
deformities as flat-foot or knock-knee, and badly united fractures of
the great toe undergoes changes characteristic of arthritis deformans.
A number of cases have been recorded in which arthritis deformans has
followed upon antecedent disease of the joint, such as pyogenic or
gonorrhoeal synovitis, upon repeated haemorrhages into the knee-joint in
established.
[Illustration: FIG. 157.--Arthritis Deformans of Elbow, showing
destruction of articular surfaces and masses of new bone around the
(Anatomical Museum, University of Edinburgh.)]
Lastly, Poncet and other members of the Lyons school regard arthritis
deformans as due to an attenuated form of tuberculous infection, and
draw attention to the fact that a tuberculous family history is often
met with in the subjects of the disease.
eburnation and grooving of articular surfaces.
surfaces undergo degenerative changes. The primary change involves the
enlarged cancellous spaces are opened into and an eroded and worm-eaten
worn away, so that in a ball-and-socket joint like the hip, the head of
More commonly, the bone exposed as a result of disappearance of the
movements of the joint, becomes smooth and polished--a change described
such as the knee and elbow, the influence of movement is shown by a
[Illustration: FIG. 159.--Hypertrophied Fringes of Synovial Membrane in
(Museum of Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh.)]
While these degenerative changes are gradually causing destruction of
the articular surfaces, reparative and hypertrophic changes are taking
place at the periphery. Along the line of the junction between the
cartilage and synovial membrane, the proliferation of tissue leads to
are subsequently converted into bone (Fig. 157). Gross alterations in
clinically and in skiagrams, and which tend to restrict the normal range
of movement. The extension of the ossification into the synovial
reflection and capsular ligament adds a collar or "lip" of new bone,
ligaments, insertions of tendons and intermuscular septa giving rise to
bony outgrowths or osteophytes not unlike those met with in the
increased vascularity and thickening of the membrane and an enlargement
lipoma_ (Fig. 159). Individual fringes may attain the size of a hazel
and may become impacted between the articular surfaces. These changes in
attended with marked restriction of movement and sometimes by "locking"
of the joint, practically never result in ankylosis.
The _ankylosing type_ of chronic arthritis is fortunately much rarer
membrane proliferates, grows over the cartilage, and replaces it, and
when two such articular surfaces are in contact they tend to adhere,
thus obliterating the joint, cavity, and resulting in fibrous or bony
ankylosis. The changes progress slowly and, before they result in
distortion and deformity which, in the case of the fingers, is extremely
rapidity, so that in the course of months it may cause crippling of
several joints. The course of the disease as met with in persons past
stiffness, especially in the morning after rest, which passes off
temporarily with use of the limb. As time goes on, the range of movement
be prolonged indefinitely; if it progresses, stiffness becomes more
directions, and deformed attitudes add to the disablement. The disease
_Hydrops_ is most marked in the knee, and may affect also the adjacent
bursae. As the joint becomes distended with fluid, the ligaments are
of a feeling of weight, of insecurity, and of tiredness. Pain is
extremely chronic, and may last for an indefinite number of years. It is
to be diagnosed from the other forms of hydrops already considered--the
purely traumatic, the pyogenic, gonorrhoeal, tuberculous, and
_Hypertrophied fringes and pedunculated or loose bodies_ often co-exist
type of the arborescent lipoma, project into the cavity of the joint,
filling up its recesses and distending its capsule so that the joint is
swollen and slightly flexed. Pain is not a prominent feature, and the
patient may walk fairly well. On grasping the joint while it is being
actively flexed and extended, the fringes may be felt moving under the
fingers. Symptoms from impaction of a loose body are exceptional.
[Illustration: FIG. 160.--Arthritis Deformans of Hands, showing
symmetry of lesions, ulnar deviation of fingers, and nodular thickening
knee, is met with in other joints, either as a mon-articular or
poly-articular disease; and it is also met with in the joints of the
tends to assume a nodular type (Heberden's nodes) (Fig. 160); in younger
subjects it assumes a more painful and progressive fusiform type
crackings, and aching, aggravated by changes in the weather. The
roughness due to fibrillation of the articular cartilages causes coarse
friction on moving the joint, or, in the knee, on moving the patella on
lipping and other hypertrophic changes in the ends of the bones are
The capsular ligament, except in hydrops, is the seat of
atrophy, tendons become adherent to their sheaths and may be ossified,
the surrounding tissues.
_The X-ray appearances of arthritis deformans_ necessarily vary with the
there is a narrowing of the spaces between the articular ends of the
the density of the shadow of the bone in the areas affected.
[Illustration: FIG. 161.--Arthritis Deformans affecting several
Joints, in a boy aet. 10.
symptoms. On no account should the affected joints be kept at rest by
means of splints or other apparatus. Active movements and exercises of
all kinds are to be persevered with. When pain is a prominent feature,
it may be relieved either by douches of iodine and hot water (tincture
with a lotion made up of chloral hydrate, gr. v, glycerin [dram]j, water
and sudden changes of temperature are to be avoided. The induction of
often of service. Operative interference is indicated when the disease
is of a severe type, when it is mon-articular, and when the general
condition of the patient is otherwise favourable. Excision has been
practised with success in the hip, knee, elbow, and temporo-mandibular
joints. Limitation of movement and locking at the hip-joint when due to
hypertrophied fringes if causing symptoms may also be removed by
operation.
When stiffness and grating on movement are prominent features we have
vaseline afford decided relief.
The patient should be nourished well, and there need be no restriction
digestion is not impaired. Benefit is also derived from the
administration of cod-liver oil, and of tonics, such as strychnin,
arsenic, and iron, and in some cases of iodide of potassium. Luff
recommends the administration over long periods of guaiacol carbonate,
often beneficial.
In some cases benefit has followed the prolonged internal administration
brought about improvement by short-circuiting or by resecting the colon.
Residence in a warm and dry climate, with an open-air life, has been
known to arrest the disease when other measures have failed to give
relief.
The application of radium and the ingestion of radio-active waters have
#Haemophilic# or #Bleeder's Joint#.--This is a rare but characteristic
apparent cause, a haemorrhage takes place into the joint. The joint is
the patient is obliged to lie up. The temperature is often raised (101 o
to 102 o F.), especially if there are also haemorrhages elsewhere. The
blood in the joint is slowly re-absorbed, and by the end of a fortnight
abnormally vascular, and coloured brown from the deposit of blood
is a deposit of rust-coloured fibrin; there may be extensive adhesions,
deformans with erosion and ulceration of the cartilage and a form of dry
caries of the articular surfaces, which may terminate in ankylosis.
tuberculous disease of the synovial membrane. From errors in diagnosis
such joints have been operated upon, with disastrous results due to
haemorrhage.
The treatment of a recent haemorrhage consists in securing absolute rest
c.c.) into a vein may assist in arresting the haemorrhage;
anti-diphtheritic serum is that most readily obtainable.
After an interval, measures should be adopted to promote the absorption
movements, and extension with weight and pulley.
JOINT DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH LESIONS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM:
NEURO-ARTHROPATHIES
_In Lesions of Peripheral Nerves._--In the hand, and more rarely in the
foot, when one or other of the main nerve-trunks has been divided or
compressed, the joints may become swollen and painful and afterwards
become stiff and deformed. Bony ankylosis has been observed.
_In Affections of the Spinal Medulla._--In myelitis, progressive
muscular atrophy, poliomyelitis, insular sclerosis, and in traumatic
lesions, joint affections are occasionally met with.
was first described by Charcot in 1868--hence the term "Charcot's
disease" applied to them. Although they usually develop in the ataxic
stage, one or more years after the initial spinal symptoms, they may
determined by some injury. The joints of the lower extremity are most
proportion of cases--both knees or both hips, for instance, being
Among the theories suggested in explanation of these arthropathies the
vascular lesions of a syphilitic type in the articular arteries.
The first symptom is usually a swelling of the joint and its vicinity.
swelling, unlike ordinary oedema, scarcely pits even on firm pressure.
joint becomes enormously swollen, loses its normal contour, and the ends
of the bones become irregularly deformed (Fig. 162). Sometimes, and
fringes--and great oedema of the peri-articular tissues (Fig. 163). The
joint is wobbly or flail-like from stretching and destruction of the
wearing down and total disappearance of the ends of the bones is the
prominent feature, attended with flail-like movements and with coarse
grating. Dislocation is observed chiefly at the hip, and is rather a
and it is usually possible to move the bones freely upon one another and
formation of new bone in the capsular ligament and surrounding muscles.
of a malignant tumour. The most useful factor in diagnosis is the entire
absence of pain, of tenderness, and of common sensibility. The freedom
with which a tabetic patient will allow his disorganised joint to be
handled requires to be seen to be appreciated.
[Illustration: FIG. 163.--Charcot's Disease of Left Knee. The joint is
distended with fluid and the whole limb is oedematous.]
The rapidity of the destructive changes in certain cases of tabes, and
the entire absence of joint lesions in others, would favour the view
In _syringomyelia_, joint affections (gliomatous arthropathies) are more
frequent than in tabes, and they usually involve the upper extremity in
tabes. The completeness of the analgesia of the articular structures
and of the overlying soft parts is illustrated by the fact that in one
his elbow with the aid of a pair of scissors, and that in another the
The disease may become arrested or may go on to complete
disorganisation; suppuration may ensue from infection through a breach
of the surface, and in rare cases the joint has become the seat of
tuberculosis.
[Illustration: FIG. 165.--Charcot's Disease of both Ankles: back view.
Man, aet. 32.]
_Treatment_, in addition to that of the nerve lesion underlying the
arthropathy, consists in supporting and protecting the joint by means of
bandages, splints, and other apparatus. In the lower extremity, the use
withdrawal of fluid. The best possible result being rigid ankylosis in a
good position, it may be advisable to bring this about artificially by
affected and when the cord lesion is such as will permit of the patient
using the limb. The wounds heal well, but the victims of tabes are
liability to intercurrent complications. When the limb is quite useless,
_In cerebral lesions_ attended with hemiplegia, joint affections,
characterised by evanescent pain, redness, and swelling, are
occasionally met with. The secondary changes in joints which are the
seat of paralytic contracture are considered with the surgery of the
Extremities.
In cases of _hysteria_ and other _functional affections of the
nervous system_, an intermittent neuropathic hydrops has been
fills with fluid and its movements become restricted, and after from two
to eight days the swelling subsides and the joint returns to normal. A
remarkable feature of the condition is that the effusion into the joint
recurs at regular intervals, it may be over a period of years. Psychic
conditions have been known to induce attacks, and sometimes to abort
that treatment by suggestion should be employed along with tonic doses
HYSTERICAL OR MIMETIC JOINT AFFECTIONS
of joints, characterised by the prominence of subjective symptoms and
the absence of pathological changes. Although most frequently met with
in young women with an impressionable nervous system, and especially
among those in good social circumstances, it occurs occasionally in men.
organs; or the condition may be an involuntary imitation of the symptoms
of organic joint disease presented by a relative or friend.
It is characteristic that the symptoms develop abruptly without
satisfactory cause, that they are exaggerated and wanting in harmony
any of the known forms of organic disease. In some cases the only
complaint is of severe pain; more often this is associated with
excessive tenderness and with impairment of the functions of the joint.
over it is remarkably sensitive. A light touch is more likely to excite
will elicit movement. It is characteristic of this, as of other
the patient's attention is diverted, the pain and stiffness may
disappear. There is no actual swelling of the joint, although there may
occur--in the knee with flexion, in the hip with flexion and adduction.
condition is liable to be mistaken for such organic lesions as a
tuberculous or pyogenic focus in the bone close to the joint.
The greatest difficulty is met with in the knee and hip, where the
Rontgen rays, or examination of the joint under anaesthesia, is helpful.
affected limb by means of massage, exercises, baths, and electricity.
Splints are to be avoided. In refractory cases, benefit may follow the
the patient being secluded from her friends and placed in charge of a
wasted from prolonged disuse, a considerable time may elapse before the
limb returns to normal.
TUMOURS AND CYSTS
New growths taking origin in the synovial membrane are rare, and are not
usually diagnosed before operation. They are attended with exudation
into the joint, and in the case of _sarcoma_ the fluid is usually
joint, it may cause symptoms of loose body. One or two cases have been
recorded in which a _cartilaginous tumour_ growing from the synovial
adjoining muscles. _Multiple cartilaginous tumours_ forming loose bodies
are described on p. 544.
formed in relation to the capsular ligament. Cystic distension of bursae
In the majority of cases, cysts in relation to joints give rise to
LOOSE BODIES
It is convenient to describe the varieties of loose bodies under two
heads: those composed of fibrin, and those composed of organised
connective tissue.
#Fibrinous Loose Bodies# (Corpora oryzoidea).--These are homogeneous or
only one, and it may attain considerable dimensions. They are not
peculiar to joints, for they are met with in tendon sheaths and bursae,
and their presence is almost invariably associated with an effusion of
fibrin-forming elements in the exudate, their occurrence in tuberculous
fibrinous degeneration of the surface layer of the diseased synovial
membrane. However formed, their shape is the result of mechanical
_Clinically_, loose bodies composed of fibrin constitute an unimportant
addition to the features of the disease with which they are associated.
They never give rise to the classical symptoms associated with impaction
of a loose body between the articular surfaces. Their presence may be
recognised, especially in the knee, by the crepitating sensation
flexed and extended by the patient.
The _treatment_ is directed towards the disease underlying the hydrops.
If it is desired to empty the joint, this is best done by open
incision.
[Illustration: FIG. 166.--Radiogram of Multiple Loose Bodies in
#Bodies composed of Organised Connective Tissue.#--These are
disease, such as arthritis deformans, Charcot's arthropathy, or synovial
tuberculosis. They take origin almost exclusively from an erratic
entirely of fat, the arborescent lipoma (Fig. 159) being the most
pronounced example of this variety. Fibrous tissue or cartilage may
form in one or more of the fatty fringes and give rise to hard nodular
masses, which may attain a considerable size, and in course of time may
may give way and the body become free. In this condition it may wander
about the joint, or lie snugly in one of its recesses until disturbed by
deriving the necessary nutriment from the surrounding fluid. The size
and number of the bodies vary widely. Single specimens have been known
considerably over a hundred.
a = Convex surface.   b = Concave surface.]
The _clinical features_ in this group are mainly those of the disease
Treatment is to be directed towards the primary disease in the joint, as
well as to the removal of the loose bodies.
Synovial Membrane, from Shoulder-joint, the seat of arthritis deformans,
_Loose Bodies in Joints which are otherwise healthy._--It is in joints
otherwise healthy that loose bodies causing the classical symptoms and
chiefly in the knee and elbow of healthy males under the age of thirty.
or flex the joint completely. In many cases a clear account is given of
the symptoms which arise when the body is impacted between the articular
surfaces, namely, sudden onset of intense sickening pain, loss of power
accompaniments of a severe sprain. On some particular movement, the
body is disengaged, the locking disappears, and recovery takes place.
Attacks of this kind may recur at irregular intervals, during a period
been recurrent attacks of locking, the ligaments become slack, the joint
surgeon, may discover the loose body and feel it roll beneath his
fingers, especially if it is lodged in the supra-patellar pouch in the
aware not only of the existence of the loose body, but of its erratic
appearance at different parts of the joint. This feature serves to
bone, it is recognisable in a skiagram.
Knee-joint.]
There are two methods of _removing the body_; the first and simpler
method is applicable when the body can be palpated, usually in the
supra-patellar pouch; it is preferably transfixed by a needle and can
freely opened and explored, firstly to find the body and further to
The characters of this type of loose body are remarkably constant. It is
usually solitary, about the size of a bean or almond, concavo-convex in
usually the medial condyle of the femur, from which it is readily
shelled out by means of an elevator. It presents on section a layer of
articular cartilage on the convex aspect and a variable thickness of
spongy bone beneath this.
The origin of these bodies is one of the most debated questions in
as portions of the articular surface which have been detached by a
morbid process which he calls "osteochondritis dessicans."
_Multiple Chondromas and Osteomas of the Synovial Membrane._--In this
cartilage, or of bone, or of transition stages between cartilage and
bone. They are pearly white in colour, pitted and nodular on the
surface, rarely larger than a pea, although when compressed they may
cake into masses of considerable size. With the movements of the joint
many of the tumours become detached and lie in the serous exudate
the tendon of the biceps, in the hip in the bursal extension beneath the
psoas.
The patient complains of increasing disability of the limb, movements of
the joint becoming more and more restricted and painful. There is
swelling corresponding to the distended capsule of the joint, and on
palpation the bodies moving under the fingers yield a sensation as of
the shape of the synovial sac. The stiffness and the cracking on
in the knee-joint of adult women, one in the shoulder-joint of an adult
male (Fig. 168), and Caird has observed one in the hip. The treatment
consists in opening the joint by free incision and removing the bodies.
_Displacement of the menisci_ of the knee is referred to with injuries
INDEX
  Abdominal aneurysm, 313
    aorta, compression of, 269
  Abscess, 46
    of bone, 448
    Brodie's, 448
    chronic, 139
    cold, 139
    pointing of, 48
    residual, 141
    of skin, multiple, 382
    stitch, 51
    treatment of, 49
      peri-articular, 514, 517
  Achillo-dynia, 422
  Acidosis, 251
  Acromion bursa, 429
  Active hyperaemia, 39
  Acupuncture in aneurysm, 308
  Acute arthritis of infants, 440
    necrosis of bone, 439
  Adductor longus muscle, rupture of, 408
  Adenoma, 202
    malignant, 209
    varieties of, 202
  Adiposus dolorosa, 186
  Aerobes, 19
  Air embolism, 265
  Albumosuria, 195, 474, 492
  Ambrine, 13, 238
  Amputation neuroma, 344
  Anaesthesia, after nerve injuries, 347
  Analgesia, 347
  Anaphylaxis, 23
  Anatomical tubercle, 134
  Anatomy. _See_ Surgical Anatomy
  Aneurysm, 300. _See also_ Individual Arteries
    abdominal, 313
    amputation in, 310
    by anastomosis, 298
    Anel's operation for, 307, 310
    of bone, 498
    brachial, 318
    Brasdor's operation for, 308
    cirsoid, 299
    compression for, 308
    consolidated, 304, 305
    differential diagnosis of, 305
    diffused, 302
    digital compression in, 308
    fusiform, 301
    Hunter's operation for, 307
    of individual arteries, 312
    inguinal, 318
    innominate, 314
    of leg and foot, 320
    Macewen's acupuncture for, 308
    Matas' operation for, 307
    Moore-Corradi method, 308
    natural cure of, 305
    old operation for, 307
    pathological, 301
    sacculated, 302
    suppuration in, 306
    traumatic, 263, 310
    varicose, 311
  Aneurysmal varix, 311, 316, 318, 319, 320
  Angioma, 284
    arterial, 299
    capillary, 294
    racemosum venosum, 287
    sarcoma, 199
  Angler's elbow, 406
  Ankle, cellulitis of, 58
  Anthracaemia, 121
  Anti-bacterial sera, 23
    -streptococcic serum, 23, 109
    -tetanic serum, 117
  Antibodies, 22
  Antiseptics, 242
  Antitoxic sera, 23
  Antitoxins, 22
    aneurysm of, 313
    embolism of, 93
    ligation of, 314
    pulsating, 305, 314
  Arborescent lipoma, 423
    compression of individual, 269
    gangrene following ligation of, 94
    gunshot wounds of, 263
  Arteries, ligation of, for aneurysm, 307
    punctured wounds of, 262
    rupture of, 260
    wounds of, 261, 262
  Arterio-venous aneurysm, 310
  Arteritis, varieties of, 282
  Arthritis, 501. _See also_ Individual Joints
    acute, 506
    gonococcal, 510
    neuropathic, 532
    pneumococcal, 509
    rheumatic, 523
    rheumatoid, 524
    scarlatinal, 508
    traumatic, 524
    tuberculous, 512
  Arthrolysis, 505
  Arthropathies, 532
    gliomatous, 534
  Arthroplasty, 505
  Articular caries, 502, 514
  Artificial hyperaemia, 39
  Ascites, chylous, 325
    of tendons, 411
  Axilla, cellulitis of, 58
    hygroma of, 328
    artery, embolus of, 93
    lymph glands, 336
  Bacillus aerogenes capsulatus, 99
    anthracis, 119
    coli communis, 27
    drum-stick, 112
    of Ducrey, 154
    of malignant oedema, 101
    mallei, 123
    pyocyaneus, 29
    of soft sore, 154
    of tetanus, 112
    tubercle, 133
    typhosus, 29, 452
  Bacteria, death of, 21
    pyogenic, 24, 29
  Bacterial intoxication, 21
  Bazin's disease, 74, 169
  Beck's paste in sinuses, 145
  Bed-sores, 73, 103
  Bence-Jones on albumosuria, 195, 474, 492
  Biceps, bursa under, 430
    dislocation of long tendon of, 409
    rupture of, 407
  Bier's artificial hyperaemia, 38
  Birth palsies, 362
  Biskra button, 129
  Bismuth gauze, 247
    injections in sinuses, 145
  Bites of animals, 223
  Bleeders, 277
    bruises in, 218
    cysts, 214, 220
  Bloodless state, treatment of, 276
  Boil, 379
  Bone. _See also_ Individual Bones
    abscess of, 448
    aneurysm of, 498
    angioma of, 491
    atrophy of, 479
    caries of, 437, 438
    changes in ulcers of leg, 79
    chondroma of, 487
    cysts of, 477, 500
    diseases of, 434
    endothelioma of, 492
    exostoses of, 191, 481
    fibroma of, 491
    fragility of, 479
    grafting, 16, 436
    gumma of, 464
    hyperostosis, 435, 464
    hypertrophic pulmonary osteo-arthropathy, 480
    malacia of, 473
    myeloma of, 491
    myxoma of, 491
    necrosis of, 438
    osteoma of, 481
    osteomyelitis of, 65, 437, 438, 451, 453, 473
    osteoporosis of, 437
    osteopsathyrosis, 479
    Paget's disease of, 474
    periostitis, 437
    pyogenic diseases of, 438
    regeneration of, 436
    sarcoma of, 492
    sclerosis of, 435
    surgical anatomy of, 434
    staphylococcal diseases of, 438
    transplantation of, 436
      malignant, 492, 499
      metastatic, 499
  Bovine tuberculosis, 136
      compression of, 269
    fibrositis, 413
    neuralgia, 371
  Brain, joint affections in lesions of, 537
  Branchial dermoids, 211
  Brasdor's operation for aneurysm, 308
  Brodie's abscess, 448
  Bruises, 218
    of soft sores, 155
  Bullet bubo, 153
    varieties of, 230
  Burnol, 238
  Burns, 233
    classification, of, 234
  Bursae. _See also_ Individual Bursae
    adventitious, 426
    affections of, 426
    diseases of, 426, 428
    haematoma of, 426
    hydrops of, 427
    hygroma of, 423
    inflammation of, 426
  Cachexia, cancerous, 207
  Calcanean bursa, 432
  Calcification in arteries, 282
    arsenic, 395
    cachexia in, 207
    chimney-sweep's, 395
    colloid, 210
    columnar epithelial, 209
    contagiousness of, 205
    degeneration of, 205
    encephaloid, 210
    increase of, 207
    melanotic, 210, 341, 397
    paraffin, 395
    pigmented, 210
    of skin, 394
    squamous epithelial, 208
    ulceration of, 205
  Cantharides plaster, 42
  Capillaries, anatomy of, 258
  Capillary angioma, 294
  Carbolic gangrene, 95
  Carbon-dioxide snow, 297
  Carbuncle, 380
  Carcinoma. _See_ Cancer
    of articular surfaces, 502, 514
    sicca, 438
    syphilitic, 462
    tuberculous, 455
  Carotid aneurysm, 314
  Carpal ganglion, 214
  Carron oil, 238
    ulceration of, 502, 514
  Cartilaginous exostosis, 191, 481
  Caseation in tuberculosis, 136
  Catalepsy, 116
  Catgut, infection by, 51
    preparation of, 245
  Cellulitis, 52
    in different situations, 58
    diffuse, 52
  Cerebro-spinal meningitis, 115
  Cervical adenitis, 332
  Chalk stones in gouty joints, 523
    erratic, 153
    extra-genital, 153
    hard, 151
    meatal, 152
    multiple, 152
    relapsing false indurated, 172
    soft, 154
    urethral, 152
  Cheloid. _See_ Keloid
  Chemiotaxis, 32
  Chigoe, 130
  Chloroma, 200
  Chondroma, 189, 487
    multiple, 544
  Chondromatosis, 488
  Chondro-sarcoma, 189, 200, 487
  Choroiditis, syphilitic, 177
  Chylous ascites, 325
  Cicatrices, varieties of, 400
  Cicatricial contraction, 4
    tissue, 4
  Cocci, 18
  Coeliac artery, aneurysm of, 313
  Collapse, 254
  Colles' law, 178
  Colloid cancer, 210
  Common peroneal nerve, 370
  Compound palmar ganglion, 217, 423
  Congenital fistulas, 60
  Contracture of joints, 502
    of muscles, 415
  Cornea, syphilitic ulceration of, 177
  Corns, 377
  Craniotabes, 175, 176, 465
  Crural fibrositis, 413
  Crutch paralysis, 351
  Cupping dry, 39
    wet, 42
  Cutis anserina, 36
  Cyanosis, traumatic, 254
  Cyst, 212
    atheromatous, 389
    Baker's, 539
    blood 214, 220
    of bone, 477, 500
    dentigerous, 193
    derma, 210
    ganglionic, 215
    hydatid, 213
    lymph, 214
    sebaceous, 212, 389
    serous, 219
    venous, 289
  Cystic adenoma, 202
    carcinoma, 210
    hygroma of neck, 328
    lymphangioma, 327, 328
    tuberculous, 460
  Dancer's sprain, 406
  Deafness, syphilitic, 178
  Delhi boil, 129
    traumatic, 257
  Delirium tremens, 256
  Dercum on adiposus dolorosa, 186
  Derma-cysts, 210
  Dermatitis, 239, 292
  Diarsenol, 163
  Diapedesis of red corpuscles, 32
    cellulitis, 52
    fibromatosis, 194
    lipomatosis, 187
    neuro-fibromatosis, 355
    osteoma, 485
  Diphtheria, 109
    antitoxin in, 111
    intubation in, 111
  Dislocation of nerves, 351, 369
    of tendons, 408
  Double cyanide gauze, 247
  Drill-bone, 418
  Drop-finger, 411
  Drunkard's palsy, 351, 364
  Ducrey's bacillus, 154
  Duodenum, ulceration of, in burns, 236
  Dwarf, rickety, 469
    syphilitic, 178
  Ecchondroses, 527
  Ecchymosis, 218
  Echinococcus, 213
  Echthyma, 158
  Elbow, angler's, 406
    cellulitis of, 58
  Electricity, injuries by, 239
  Electrolysis in angioma, 297
  Elephantiasis, varieties of, 360, 384, 386
  Embolism, 281
    air, 265
    of individual arteries, 93
  Emigration of leucocytes, 32
  Emotional shock, 251
  Emprosthotonos, 214
  Empyema of joints, 501, 518
  Endarteritis obliterans, 282
  Endo-aneurysmorrhaphy, 307
    of bone, 492
  Epidermis, grafting, 12
    repair of, 4
  Epiphysial cartilage, 434
    junction, 434
  Epiphysiolysis, 440
  Epiphysitis, 437
    syphilitic, 465
  Epithelioma, 208
    chimney-sweep's, 395
    lupus, 384
    paraffin, 395
    sinus, 500
    of skin, 394
    varieties of, 208
    repair of, 6
  Epulis, 491
  Erb's paralysis, 361
    nodosum, 442
  Evaporating lotions, 41
  Exfoliation, 438
  Exophthalmos, pulsating, 317
  Exostosis, 191, 481
    bursata, 481
    cancellous, 481
    cartilaginous, 191, 481
    ivory, 481
  Explosives, wounds by, 231
  External popliteal nerve. _See_ Common Peroneal Nerve
  Exudates, varieties of, 33
  Exudation cysts, 212
  Facial artery, compression of, 269
    erysipelas, 107
  Fainting, 249
  Fat embolism, 254
  Feet, trench, 96
  Femoral aneurysm, 318
    artery compression of, 269
    embolus of, 93
    lymph glands, 323
  Fever, 35
  Fibroblasts, 3
  Fibroid, recurrent, of Paget, 199, 392, 420
    uterine, 195
    diffuse, 194
    of skin, 391
    varieties of, 194
  Fibromatosis, diffuse, 194
  Fibro-myoma, 195
  Fibro-sarcoma, 199
  Fibrositis, varieties of, 372, 412
  Filaria Bancrofti, 326
  Finger, chancre of, 154
    drop-, 411
  Fistula, 60
    varieties of, 60
  Fluctuation, 49
  Foot, cellulitis of, 58
    Madura, 129
    perforating ulcer of, 73
  Forci-pressure in haemorrhage, 271
    cellulitis of, 58
  Fracture, pathological, 444
  Friedlander's pneumo-bacillus, 28
  Frost-bite, gangrene from, 95
    compound palmar, 217, 423
  Gangrene, 86
    carbolic, 95
    from chemical agents, 95
    clinical types of, 86
    from constriction of vessels, 94
    from ergot, 98
    from interference with circulation, 86
    following ligation of arteries, 94
    line of demarcation in, 87
    malignant oedema, 101
    noma, 102
    phagedaena, 153
    senile, 88
    white, 93
    from whitlow, 99
  Gas gangrene, 102
  Gasserian ganglion, removal of, 375
  Gauze, sterilisation of, 245
  Gelatinous degeneration of joints, 515
  Giant cells, 3
  Glanders, 123
  Glands, lymph. _See_ Lymph Glands
  Gliomatous arthropathies, 534
  Glio-sarcoma, 200
  Glycosuria in perforating ulcer, 73
  Golfer's back, 405
  Gonorrhoeal bursitis, 428
    lymphangitis, 325
    rheumatism, 510
    tophi, 523
    ulcers, 77
    of epithelium, 12
    of skin, 11
    of tissues, 10
    tissue, formation of, 2
      tuberculous, 136
    filarial disease in lymphatics of, 326
  Growing pains, 451
    peri-bursal, 521
    subcutaneous, 76
    syphilitic, 168
  Gummatous infiltration, 168
  Gunshot wounds, 225, 227, 230
    bursal, 426
    pulsating, of bone, 498
  Haemophilia, 277
  Haemophilic joint, 531
  Haemoptysis, 259
  Haemorrhage, 266
    arrest of, 266, 270, 272, 274
    arterial, 259
    capillary, 260
    constitutional effects of, 275
    digital compression in, 269
    external, 259
    ligature in, 270
    in operations, 269
    reactionary, 272
    styptics in, 271
    tourniquets in, 270, 272
    toxic, 275
    from varicose veins, 292
  Haemorrhagic diathesis, 277
  Haemostatics, 271
  Hair, syphilitic lesions of, 159
  Hands, disinfection of, 244
    by first intention, 2
    rate of, 9
    sore, 69, 81
    by union of granulating surfaces, 5
  Heart, massage of, 265
  Hernia, fatty, 187
    of muscle, 408
  Hilton's method of opening abscess, 50
  Hodgkin's disease, 377
  Horns, varieties of, 389, 391
  Housemaid's knee, 426, 431
  Hunter's operation for aneurysm, 307
  Hutchinson's teeth, 177
  Hydrocele of neck, 328
  Hydrops, 501, 518
    bursal, 427
    of neck, 328
    active, 39
    passive, 38
    syphilitic, 464
  Hypertrophic pulmonary osteo-arthropathy, 480
  Iliac aneurysm, 318
  Imperial drink, 40
    by catgut, 51
    mixed, 20
  Inflammation, 31
    changes in, 32
    chronic, 42
    constitutional disturbance in, 35
    general principles of treatment in, 36, 39
    stages of, 32
    lymph glands, 323
  Injuries, 218. _See also_ Individual Tissues and Regions
  Intercostal fibrositis, 413
  Intermittent claudication of vessels, 98
  Internal popliteal nerve. _See_ Tibial Nerve
  Interstitial keratitis, 177
  Intestine, repair of, 9
  Intoxication, bacterial, 21
  Intubation of larynx, 111
  Involucrum, 443
  Iodine, catgut, 246
    for disinfection of skin, 245
    injection of, 142
  Irrigation, continuous, 54
  Ischaemic contracture of muscles, 415
  Ischias scoliotica, 372
    changes in, in rickets, 470
    cystic tumours of, 193
  Joints. _See also_ Individual Joints
    ankylosis of, 503
    bacterial diseases of, 506
    bleeder's, 531
    Charcot's disease of, 533
    contracture of, 502
    cysts of, 538
    developmental errors of, 505
    diseases of, general, 501, 506
    disorganisation of, 502
    gelatinous degeneration of, 515
    gliomatous arthropathies, 534
    gonococcal affections of, 510
    hydrops of, 501
    impaired mobility of, 502
    iodoform in diseases of, 519
    mimetic affections of, 537
    neuro-arthropathies, 532
    pneumococcal infection of, 509
    pyaemic affections of, 508
    rigidity of, 502
    scarlet fever, infection of, in 508
    spinal diseases affecting, 532
    starting pains in, 502, 517
    tuberculous diseases of, 512
    tumours of, 538
  Jumper's sprain, 406
  Keratitis, interstitial, in syphilis, 177
  Klapp's suction bells, 39
  Klebs-Loffler bacillus, 109
  Klumpke's paralysis, 361
    ganglion of, 215
    housemaid's, 426, 431
  Kyphosis, 471
  Labourer's back, 405
  Larynx, syphilis of, 177
  Leg ulcer, 72
  Leontiasis ossea, 485
  Leucocytes, emigration of, 32
    wandering, 3
  Leucocythaemia, 340
  Leucocytosis, 22, 29
    digestion, 30
    local, 32
    post-operative, 30
  Leucopenia, 30
  Leucoplakia, 167
  Line of demarcation in gangrene, 87
  Lingual dermoids, 211
  Lipoma, 184
    diffuse, 187
    multiple, 186
    nasi, 393
    subcutaneous, 184, 186
    subsynovial, 187
  Lipping of bone, 527
    puris, 45
  Loose bodies in bursae, 427
    in joints, 529, 539
    in tendon sheaths, 423
    varieties of, 539
  Luargol, 163
  Luetin, 149
  Lupus, 134, 382
    epithelioma, 384
    syphilitic, 169
    varieties of, 383, 393
  Lymph, 321
      diseases of, 329
      functions of, 221
      sarcoma of, 341
      surgical anatomy of, 321
      syphilitic diseases of, 337
      tuberculosis of, 331
      tumours of, 340
    scrotum, 389
    vessels, diseases of, 325
      injuries of, 323
  Lymphadenitis, 53, 329
  Lymphangioplasty, 325, 386
    septic, 53
    varieties of, 325
  Lymphatic cyst, 328
    fistula, 324
    oedema, 325
  Lymphatics, 321
  Lymphocytosis, 29
  Lympho-sarcoma, 199, 340
  Macewen's method of compressing abdominal aorta, 269
  _Main en griffe_, 369
  Malignant adenoma, 209
    cachexia, 207
    pustule, 120
    tumours, 183
  Mallein test, 125
  Matas' operation for aneurysm, 307
  Medullary cancer, 210
  Melanotic cancer, 210, 397
    sarcoma, 200
  Melon-seed bodies, 539
  Mercury in syphilis, administration of, 165
  Michel's clips, 222
  Micrococci, 18
  Micro-organisms, 18
  Microphages, 22
  Mimetic joint affections, 537
    naevus, 295
    venereal infection, 156
  Moist gangrene, 87
  Moles, 390
    naevoid, 295
  Molluscum fibrosum, 194, 359, 391
  Moore-Corradi method of treating aneurysm, 308
  Mother's mark, 294
  Muco-pus, 52
  Mucous membrane, grafting of, 16
      suppuration in, 51
    patches, 160, 174
    atrophy of, 412
    congenital absence of, 411
    contusion of, 405
    grafting of, 16
    hernia of, 408
    hydatid cysts of, 421
    repair of, 8
    tuberculosis of, 416
    wounds of, 409
  Muscular rheumatism, 412
  Mustard leaves, 42
  Mycetoma, 129
  Myelitis, syphilitic, 161
  Myeloma, 195, 491
    of tendon sheaths, 424
  Myoma, 195
  Myo-sarcoma, 200
  Myositis ossificans, 416, 418
  Myxoma, 194
    of bone, 491
    electrolysis of, 297
    operations for, 298
    varieties of, 294
  Nail fold, whitlow of, 56
    horns, 391
    ingrowing, 403
    regeneration of, 7
    syphilitic lesions of, 159, 402
  Nasal bones, syphilitic disease of, 188, 462
  Natal sore, 129
  Neck, cystic hygroma of, 328
    glands of, diseases, 332
    hydrocele of, 328
    syphilitic, 462
  Neo-diarsenol, 163
    -salvarsan, 163
  Nerve of Bell. _See_ Long Thoracic Nerve
    avulsion of, 375
    bullet wounds of, 346
    diseases of, 352
    individual, surgery of, 360
    reaction of degeneration, 347
    in scar tissue, 345
      secondary, 349
    torn, 345
  Neuralgia, varieties of, 371
  Neurectomy, 375
  Neuro-fibromatosis, 355, 359
  Neurolysis, 345
  Nodes, periosteal, 464
  Nose, sebaceous adenoma of, 393
  Nucleinate of soda, 29
  O'Dwyer's intubation apparatus, 111
    persistent, 109
  Olecranon bursa, 428
  Operations during shock, 252
  Opisthotonos, 114
  Opsonins, 22
  Orbital aneurysm, 317
  Orthotonos, 114
  Ossification in muscles, tendons, and fasciae, 416
  Ossifying junction, 434
  Osteo-arthritis, 524
  Osteoid sarcoma, 200
    compact, 192
    diffuse, 485
    in muscles and tendons, 416
    spongy, 191
    acute, 65, 438, 451, 453
    after amputation, 453
    bipolar, 439
    fibrosa, 476
    from infection from soft parts, 453
    pyogenic, 438
    sequelae of, 443
    streptococcal, 451
    in typhoid fever, 452
  Osteoporosis, 437
  Osteopsathyrosis, 479
  Osteosarcoma, 200
  Ostitis deformans, 474
    rarefying, 474
  Ovarian dermoids, 211
  Ovary, grafting of, 16
  Ozoena, 176
  Pachydermatocele, 360
    of nipple, 397
    recurrent fibroma, 199, 392, 420
    varieties of, 35
  Painful subcutaneous nodules, 354, 392
  Palate, syphilitic lesions of, 178, 462
  Palmar ganglion, compound, 217, 423
  Papilloma, varieties of, 201, 392
  Paraffin cancer, 395
    Erb-Duchenne, 361
    Klumpke's, 361
    pseudo, of syphilis, 174, 466
  Parasitic bacteria, 20
    cysts, 213
  Paronychia. _See_ Onychia
  Parotid abscess in pyaemia, 66
    lymph glands, 321
  Parrot's nodes, 175, 465
  Passive hyperaemia, Bier's, 38
  Pasteur's treatment for hydrophobia, 119
  Pelvis, rickety changes in, 471
  Perichondritis, syphilitic, 465
  Peri-lymphangitis, 325
  Periosteum, function of, 434
    gumma of, 464
    in rickets, 469
  Periostitis, 437. _See also_ Osteomyelitis
    syphilitic, 461
    tuberculous, 455
  Peripheral neuritis, 352
  Peroneal nerve, 370
  Petrifying sarcoma, 200
  Phagedaena, 153
  Phagocytosis, 22
  Phimosis, with hard chancre, 152
  Phlebitis, 285, 292
  Picric acid, 13, 237
  Pigeon-breast, 471
  Plantaris, rupture of, 408
  Pleurodynia, 413
  Pleurosthotonos, 114
  Pneumococcus, 28
  Popliteal aneurysm, 320
    bursae, 432
    nerves. _See_ Common Peroneal Nerve and Tibial Nerve
  Port-wine stain, 294
  Post-anaesthetic paralysis, 360
    -anal dimple, 211
  Posterior auricular lymph glands, 322
  Potato-nose, 393
  Poultice, 37
    charcoal, 84
  Pre-auricular lymph glands, 322
  Prepatellar bursa, 431
  Pressure sores, 70, 82
  Protopathic sensibility of nerves, 343
  Proud flesh, 79
  Psammoma, 200
  Pseudo-paralysis of syphilis, 174, 466
  Pulmonary osteo-arthropathy, 480
  Pulsating aorta, 305, 314
  Punctured wounds, 222
  Purpura, 280
  Pus, 45
    varieties of, 46
    abscess in joints in, 508
  Pyogenic bacteria, 24, 29
  Rachitis, 468
    adolescentium, 472
  Radium, in lupus, 385
    in naevus, 297
    ulceration from, 239
  Ranula, 329
  Ray fungus, 126
  Raynaud's disease, 97
  Reaction of degeneration, 347
  Recklinghausen's disease, 355
  Recurrent fibroid of Paget, 199, 392, 420
  Repair. _See_ Individual Tissues
    conditions interfering with, 17
    after loss of tissue, 4
  Retention cysts, 212
  Retro-pharyngeal lymph glands, 322
  Reverdin's method of skin-grafting, 13
  Rhabdomyoma, 196
  Rheumatic arthritis, 524
    gout, 524
    torticollis, 413
  Rheumatism, acute, 509
    chronic, 523
    gonorrhoeal, 510
    muscular, 412
  Rheumatoid arthritis, 524
  Rhinophyma, 393
  Rickets, 468
    bone lesions in, 469
    changes in skeleton in, 470
    scurvy, 473
  Rickety, dwarf, 469
    pelvis, 471
    rosary, 469
    scoliosis, 471
    sprain, 407
  Rigor, 36
  Risus sardonicus, 114
  Rodent cancer, 210, 395
    ulcer, 210, 395
  Rupia, syphilitic, 158
  Sacculated aneurysm, 302
  Saline infusions in haemorrhage, 276
  Salvarsan in syphilis, 162
    chronic, 62
  Saprophytic bacteria, 20
    of bone, 492
    inoperable, 201
    melanotic, 200
    periosteal, 493
    of synovial membrane, 538
    of tendon sheaths, 424
  Scapula, winged, 363
  Scars. _See_ Cicatrices
  Sciatic nerve, lesions of, 370
  Sciatica, 371
  Scirrhous cancer, 210
  Sclavo's serum, 123
  Sculler's sprain, 406
  Scurvy, 473
    rickets, 473
    cysts, 389
    horns, 389
  Secondary haemorrhage, 273
  Selenium in malignant tumours, 201, 208
  Semilunar ganglion, 375
  Semi-membranosus bursa, 432
  Septicaemia, 53, 63
  Sequestrectomy, 446
  Serratus anterior muscle, paralysis of, 363
    anti-tetanic, 117
    disease, 23
    in haemophilia, 280
    polyvalent, 23
  Seton, 217
  Shock, 250
    delayed, 252
  Shoulder, fibrositis of, 413
    epithelioma, 500
    tuberculous, 143
  Skewers for prevention of haemorrhage, 270
  Skin, 376
    actinomycosis of, 126
    dermoids, 210
    grafting of, 11, 14
    preparation of, for operation, 244
    repair of, 6
    sporotrichosis of, 385
    syphilitic lesions of, 157, 166
    tuberculosis of, 382, 385
    tumours of, 391
    natiform, 176
    Parrot's nodes, 465
    unilateral hypertrophy of, 487
  Snake-bites, 131
  Snuffles, 173
  Soft chancre, 154
  Spas, 531
  Spasmodic tic, 373
  Spinal arthropathies, 532
    repair of, 9
    syphilis of, 161
  Spine, changes in rickets, 471
  Spirilla, 19
  Spirochaete pallida, 147
  Spironema pallidum, 147
  Splenic fever, 119
  Spores, 18
  Sporotrichosis, 385
  Sprain of muscle, 405, 407
  Sprinter's sprain, 406
  Staphylococcus albus, 26
    aureus, 25
  Starting pains in joints, 502, 517
  Stasis, 32
  Sterno-mastoid lymph glands, 322
  Stitches. _See_ Sutures
  Streptococci, 19, 24
  Streptococcus pyogenes, 26
  Strychnin poisoning, 115
  Sub-calcanean bursa, 433
  Subclavian aneurysm, 317
  Sub-crural bursa, 430
  Sub-deltoid bursa, 429
  Submental lymph glands, 322
  Subscapularis bursa, 430
  Suction bells, 39
  Suppuration, 45
    chronic, 59
    diffuse, 52
    in mucous membranes, 52
    in wounds, 50
  Supra-scapular nerve, lesions of, 364
    Listerian, 242
  Surgical anatomy of blood vessels, 258
    of epiphyses, 434
    of lymphatics, 321
    of nerves, 342
  Sutures, 221
    sterilisation of, 245
    local, 97
  Synostosis, 503
  Synovial membrane, tumours of, 538
  Synovitis, 501, 506
    syphilitic, 521
  Syphilis, 147. _See also_ Individual Tissues and Organs
    arsenical preparations in, 162
    arteritis in, 282
    of bursae, 428
    Colles' law, 178
    epiphysitis of infants, 465
    in female, 152, 164
    incubation of, 151
    in infants, 179
    inherited, 146, 172
      contagiousness of, 178
      diagnosis of, 178
        eyes in, 176, 177
        joints in, 522
        skin in, 173, 174
        teeth in, 177
    insontium, 153
    iritis in, 166
    of larynx, 177
    lupus, 169
    lymphangitis, 326
    in male, 152
    malignant, 161
    and marriage, 167
    mercury in, 164
    mixed infection, 156
    of mucous membranes, 160, 173, 174
    mucous patches, 160, 174
    of muscle, 416
    of nose, 188
    osteo-arthritis, 522
    of palate, 178, 462
    in pregnant women, 164
      treatment of, 163
    pseudo-paralysis of, 174, 466
    reminders, 167
    second attacks of, 172
    secondary, 151, 157
        hair in, 159
        nails in, 159, 402
        skin in, 162
    serum diagnosis, 149
    skin affections in, 157, 166
    stomatitis, 174
    teeth in, 177
    tertiary, 151, 167
      diagnosis of, 167
      lesions of mucous membrane in, 171
    ulcers in, 76, 83, 169
    virus of, 147
    Wassermann reaction in, 156
  Syphiloma, 168
  Syringomyelia, joint lesions in, 534
  Tabes dorsales, joint lesions in, 532
  Tailor's bottom, 426, 430
  Tarsal ganglion, 215
  Temperature in surgical diseases, 35, 40
    syphilitic affections of, 424
    tuberculosis of, 423, 424
    tumours of, 424
    whitlow of, 57
  Tendons. _See also_ Individual Tendons
    avulsion of, 411
    dislocation of, 408
    grafting of, 16
    inflammation of, 416
    ossification of, 416
    repair of, 8
    rupture of, 406, 408
    tumours of, 420
    wounds of, 409
  Tertiary syphilis, 151, 167
  Thirst, treatment of, 40
  Thoracic aneurysm, 312
    duct, subcutaneous rupture of, 325
      wounds of, 325
  Thorax, rickety changes in, 469
  Thrombo-phlebitis, 285
  Thyreoid gland, grafting of, 16
  Tic, spasmodic, 373
  Tinel's sign, 349
  Toe-nail, ingrowing, 403
  Toes, gouty affections of, 522
  Tomato tumour, 393
  Torsion of blood vessels, 271
  Torticollis, rheumatic, 413
  Trade arthritis, 525
    epithelionia, 395
  Transfusion of blood, 276
  Transplantation of tissues, 10
  Trench feet, 96
  Treponema pallidum, 147
  Trifacial neuralgia, 373
  Trigeminal neuralgia, 373
  Trismus, 117
  Trophic changes after nerve injuries, 348
  Trunk neuroma, 354
  Tubercle, anatomical, 134
    bacillus, 133
  Tuberculin, 138
  Tuberculosis, 133. _See also_ Individual Tissues and Organs
    bovine, 136
    of bursae, 428
    calcification in, 136
    caseation in, 136
    general, 135
    human, 136
    of joints, 512
    of lymph vessels, 326
    of muscle, 416
    of nails, 403
    open-air treatment of, 137
    passive hyperaemia in, 138
    principles of treatment of, 137
    of tendon sheaths, 423, 424
    trauma in causation of, 135
    vaccine treatment in, 138
  Tuberculous abscess, 139
    granulation tissue, 136
    lymphadenitis, 331
  Tubulo-dermoids, 211
  Tumor albus, 518
  Tumours, 181. _See also_ Individual Tumours and Tissues
  Typhoid, joint lesions in, 508
    osteomyelitis in, 452
  Ulceration, of cartilage, 502, 514
    definition of, 68
    ambulatory treatment of, 85
    Bazin's disease, 74, 169
    callous, 79, 84
    classification of, 70
    clinical examination of, 68
    crateriform, 395
    duodenal, in burns, 236
    healing, 77
    due to imperfect circulation, 71, 82
    inflamed, 79, 85
    irritable, 79, 85
    leg, 72, 169
    perforating, 73, 82
    from radium, 70
    from Rontgen rays, 70
    traumatic, 70, 81
    trophic, 73
    varicose, 72
  Varicose aneurysm, 311
    eczema, 292
    ulcer, 72
  Varix, 287
  Veins, anatomy of, 258
    entrance of air into, 265
    injuries of, 264
    repair of, 269
    rupture of, 264
    wounds of, 264
  Veldt sores, 382
  Venereal disease. _See_ Syphilis
  Venous cysts, 289
  Vibrion septique, 101
  Volkmann's ischaemic contracture, 415
  Wardrop's operation for aneurysm, 308
    venereal, 393
    X-ray, 239
  Wassermann's reaction, 156, 162
  Weaver's bottom, 426, 430
  Weir-Mitchell treatment in hysterical joint affections, 538
  Wens, 389
  White swelling of joints, 515, 518
  Whitlow, 55
    gangrene from, 99
    subcutaneous, 56
    thecal, 57
  Whitlow, of toes, 55
  Winged scapula, 363
    drainage of, 222
    by electricity, 239
    by firearms, 225, 227, 230
    infection of, 107
    lacerated, 223
    open method of treating, 247, 248
    pistol-shot, 226
    punctured, 222
    in warfare, 225, 230
  Wrist, drop-, 365
  Xanthoma, 188
  X-rays, burns by, 239
    cancer from, 395
    ulcers from, 239
    warts from, 239
      bone diseases, 445
        tumours, 485, 491, 496
      foreign bodies, 233
    in treatment of cancer, 208
      lupus, 385
      sarcoma, 201
      tuberculosis, 138
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Manual of Surgery, by 
***** This file should be named 17921-8.txt or 17921-8.zip *****
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/9/2/17921/
Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Laura Wisewell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
http://gutenberg.org/license).
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
1.E.9.
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
your equipment.
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
page at http://pglaf.org
For additional contact information:
     Chief Executive and Director
Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
particular state visit http://pglaf.org
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
     http://www.gutenberg.org
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
(#9 in our series by Leo Tolstoy)
Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.
header without written permission.
Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.
**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**
Author: Leo Tolstoy
Translator: Louise and Aylmer Maude
Release Date: April, 2001  [EBook #2600]
[Most recently updated: May 21, 2006]
Edition: 11
Language: English
Character set encoding: US-ASCII
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, WAR AND PEACE ***
War and Peace
by Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi
BOOK ONE: 1805
CHAPTER I
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna
of high rank and importance, who was the first to arrive at her
reception. Anna Pavlovna had had a cough for some days. She was, as
St. Petersburg, used only by the elite.
delivered by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
"If you have nothing better to do, Count [or Prince], and if the
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too
terrible, I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10-
Annette Scherer."
"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the
least disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing
man of importance who had grown old in society and at court. He went
"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's
"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times
like these if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are
"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I
must put in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is
coming for me to take me there."
"I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all these
"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would
force of habit said things he did not even wish to be believed.
"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's
Buonaparte has burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to
Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a
enthusiast had become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she
did not feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to
disappoint the expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile
which, though it did not suit her faded features, always played
round her lips expressed, as in a spoiled child, a continual
consciousness of her charming defect, which she neither wished, nor
could, nor considered it necessary, to correct.
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna
burst out:
things, but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war.
She is betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious
the one thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to
perform the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble
that God will not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and
on?... England with her commercial spirit will not and cannot
understand the Emperor Alexander's loftiness of soul. She has
secret motive in our actions. What answer did Novosiltsev get? None.
The English have not understood and cannot understand the
desires the good of mankind. And what have they promised? Nothing! And
always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and that all Europe
says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian neutrality is just a
trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny of our adored
monarch. He will save Europe!"
sent instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the
King of Prussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you
give me a cup of tea?"
"In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am
who is connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of
ones. And also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He
has been received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"
to him, though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive
of his visit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke
to be appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts
were trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it
for the baron.
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she
nor anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or
was pleased with.
"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her
sister," was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
Funke beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the
Pavlovna wished both to rebuke him (for daring to speak he had done of
a man recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him,
"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came
out everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly
beautiful."
The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
to the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that
intimate conversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the
eyebrows. "Two such charming children. And really you appreciate
them less than anyone, and so you don't deserve to have them."
"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I
am dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her
face assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her
Majesty's and you were pitied...."
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,
awaiting a reply. He frowned.
a father could for their education, and they have both turned out
one. That is the only difference between them." He said this smiling
in a way more natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles
round his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse
father there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna
Pavlovna, looking up pensively.
"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a
"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?"
she asked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and
though I don't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little
person who is very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of
and perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a
movement of the head that he was considering this information.
"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in
five years, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what
we fathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?"
under the late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is
very clever but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very
Meinen lately. He is an aide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here
"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Anna
Pavlovna's hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange
that affair for me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-
slafe with an f, as a village elder of mine writes in his reports.
the maid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and
fro as he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
young Bolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can
be arranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my
apprenticeship as old maid."
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highest
Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
father to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and
her badge as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess
also there. She had been married during the previous winter, and being
pregnant did not go to any large gatherings, but only to small
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my
aunt," or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or
had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to
arrive; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna
not one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of
them cared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful
and solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of
them in the same words, about their health and her own, and the health
of Her Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each
the old woman with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a
gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a
when she occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always
the case with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect--the shortness
of her upper lip and her half-open mouth--seemed to be her own special
and peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of
becoming, like her, full of life and health. All who talked to her,
and at each word saw her bright smile and the constant gleam of her
white teeth, thought that they were in a specially amiable mood that
The little princess went round the table with quick, short,
my work," said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all
present. "Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick
on me," she added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to
be quite a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed."
dainty gray dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone
added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer she
turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.
Vasili to Anna Pavlovna.
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had
only just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this
the nod she accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room.
But in spite of this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and
certainly rather bigger than the other men in the room, her anxiety
could only have reference to the clever though shy, but observant
in that drawing room.
"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor
invalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her
aunt as she conducted him to her.
the little princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate
acquaintance.
aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health.
the Abbe Morio? He is a most interesting man."
interesting but hardly feasible."
"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and
get away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now
committed a reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady
before she had finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak
feet spread apart, he began explaining his reasons for thinking the
abbe's plan chimerical.
"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave,
ready to help at any point where the conversation might happen to
flag. As the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands
to work, goes round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or
there one that creaks or makes more noise than it should, and
Pavlovna moved about her drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a
these cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident. She kept an
anxious watch on him when he approached the group round Mortemart to
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna
Pavlovna's was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all
the intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like
a child in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of
missing any clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the
self-confident and refined expression on the faces of those present he
people are fond of doing.
CHAPTER III
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
had settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed
beautiful Princess Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little
Princess Bolkonskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump
for her age. The third group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna
Pavlovna.
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and
which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up
as a treat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a
specially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen
up to her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarly
choice morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing
the murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc
particular reasons for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
the sound of that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
to comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone
to listen to his tale.
the guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to
another. "How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a
and most advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef
on a hot dish.
"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the
beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of
another group.
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with
which she had first entered the room--the smile of a perfectly
beautiful woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed
with moss and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and
sparkling diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her,
not looking at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously
shapely shoulders, back, and bosom--which in the fashion of those days
were very much exposed--and she seemed to bring the glamour of a
ballroom with her as she moved toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so
lovely that not only did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on
its effect.
"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted
"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he,
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and
still more beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond
necklace. From time to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and
whenever the story produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, at
once adopted just the expression she saw on the maid of honor's
face, and again relapsed into her radiant smile.
The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.
"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinking
of?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in
her seat.
"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she
took up her work.
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle
and moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary
resemblance to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that
in spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features
and by the wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the
contrary was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of
"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside
the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
instrument he could not begin to speak.
his shoulders.
"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be
sure whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was
dressed in a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of
cuisse de nymphe effrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
current, to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to
Paris to visit Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon
spared him, and this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by
death.
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point
where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies
little princess.
"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle
into her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he
was talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to
about the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by
theory. Both were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally,
"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of
powerful nation like Russia--barbaric as she is said to be--to place
object the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would
save the world!"
"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely at
with women.
"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have
of the climate," said he.
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the more
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
CHAPTER IV
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
Bolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome
young man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features.
measured step, offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little
wife. It was evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing
room, but had found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look
He turned away from her with a grimace that distorted his handsome
the whole company.
"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.
"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing the
last syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been
"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"
"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same
been telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who
glad, affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he
face he gave him an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
"There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to
Pierre.
vicomte who was continuing his story.
hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished
to say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his
daughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
Frenchman, holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent
his rising. "This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me
holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna
Pavlovna: "Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a
whole month and this is the first time I have seen him in society.
Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever
his father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who
Prince Vasili in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had
assumed had left her kindly and tearworn face and it now expressed
into the anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me
what news I may take back to my poor boy."
Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to
the elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might
not go away.
"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered
Prince Vasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I
That would be the best way."
obtained an invitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat
moment; then she smiled again and clutched Prince Vasili's arm more
"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you for
father's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to
do this for my son--and I shall always regard you as a benefactor,"
she added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked
Golitsyn and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always
were," she said, trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her
beautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she
economized if it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and having
his influence. But in Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her
second appeal, something like qualms of conscience. She had reminded
that she was one of those women--mostly mothers--who, having once made
up their minds, will not rest until they have gained their end, and
after hour, and even to make scenes. This last consideration moved
"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and
weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;
memory, I will do the impossible--your son shall be transferred to the
"Wait--just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..."
she faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich
Prince Vasili smiled.
since his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that
"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."
"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before,
"we shall be late."
"Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?"
"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"
"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."
"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,
naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit
her face resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She
returned to the group where the vicomte was still talking, and again
pretended to listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her
task was accomplished.
and Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and
sarcastic smile.
fine when he said that," he remarked, repeating the words in
endure this man who is a menace to everything."
"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite
but hopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis
XVII, for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he
became more animated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward
are sending ambassadors to compliment the usurper."
through his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Conde
he.
"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," the
he is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others
too far. By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French
society--I mean good French society--will have been forever destroyed,
and then..."
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to
make a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,
who had him under observation, interrupted:
"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which
always accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family,
"has declared that he will leave it to the French people themselves to
the usurper, the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the
arms of its rightful king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to the
royalist emigrant.
will be difficult to return to the old regime."
Bonaparte's side."
"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte
without looking at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to
know the real state of French public opinion."
smile.
remarks at him, though without looking at him.
"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'"
Prince Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting
Napoleon's words. "'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I
do not know how far he was justified in saying so."
"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the
people," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,
one hero less on earth."
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their
"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was
"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping
his knee with the palm of his hand.
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at
"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled
from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon
good, he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.
"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great
"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to
commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have
"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he
might rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a
extreme youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind.
"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that...
But won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.
an ironical voice.
important. What is important are the rights of man, emancipation
Napoleon has retained in full force."
"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at
does not love liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached
On the contrary. We wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had
not exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the
vicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator.
innocent and untried?"
18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at
"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the
little princess, shrugging her shoulders.
"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled.
His smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled,
his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by
to ask forgiveness.
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly
"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince
Andrew. "Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish
between his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor.
So it seems to me."
"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of
this reinforcement.
was great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa
other acts which it is difficult to justify."
attend, and asking them all to be seated began:
it. Excuse me, Vicomte--I must tell it in Russian or the point will be
attention to his story.
"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She
her taste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."
livery, get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some
calls.'"
and her long hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no
longer and went on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world
knew...."
told it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna
and the others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so
agreeably ending Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the
anecdote the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about
the last and next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom,
began to take their leave.
Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with
huge red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a
drawing room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say
something particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he
was absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his
plume, till the general asked him to restore it. All his
absent-mindedness and inability to enter a room and converse in it
was, however, redeemed by his kindly, simple, and modest expression.
see you again, but I also hope you will change your opinions, my
everybody saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions
are opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am."
And everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, felt this.
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders
indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
princess, taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in
sister-in-law.
"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone.
"Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au
revoir!"--and she left the hall.
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his
a cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to
the French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
Delightful!"
"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing
up her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he
even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either
time, as though embracing her.
he seem.
"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest
fashion reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out
into the porch following the princess, whom a footman was helping into
the carriage.
"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as
dark carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince
disagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and
The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte
whom he had promised to take home.
nice indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers.
Hippolyte burst out laughing.
continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer
who gives himself the airs of a monarch."
were saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One
took from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was
in the middle.
said Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white
hands.
eager face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
the right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but--I
do not know how to express it... not by a balance of political
power...."
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such
"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you
at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the
"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."
and had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow
his father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to
Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money.
decided on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was
had met that evening.
talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the
army; but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in
such nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult to give any
"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no
wars," he said.
"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.
Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.
me!"
CHAPTER VII
The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince
Andrew shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it
had had in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet
from the sofa. The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a
and politely placed a chair for her.
"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly
How stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for
saying so, but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative
fellow you are, Monsieur Pierre!"
intercourse with young women.
quick.
"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand
it? Now you shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here he is
known, so much appreciated by everyone. The other day at the
Apraksins' I heard a lady asking, 'Is that the famous Prince
know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously. Annette and I were
conversation, gave no reply.
"When are you starting?" he asked.
"Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken of,"
spoken to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly
ill-suited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member.
"Today when I remembered that all these delightful associations must
be broken off... and then you know, Andre..." (she looked
and a shudder ran down her back.
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone
"What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.
alone in the country."
"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.
be afraid."
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if
"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince
Andrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.
"Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew.
"You had better go."
The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip
quivered. Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about
and now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
have changed so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the
war and have no pity for me. Why is it?"
"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed an
"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you
behave like that six months ago?"
"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more
emphatically.
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened
to all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to
"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you
I myself have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me! An
outsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself...
Good-by!"
"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of
the pleasure of spending the evening with you."
"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without
restraining her angry tears.
"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch
which indicates that patience is exhausted.
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty
face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful
eyes glanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the
"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one
hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
CHAPTER VIII
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his
"Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.
They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining
room. Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and
glass bore that imprint of newness found in the households of the
newly married. Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his
elbows on the table and, with a look of nervous agitation such as
has long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak
of, and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and
all that is good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be
wasted on trifles. Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise.
If you marry expecting anything from yourself in the future, you
will feel at every step that for you all is ended, all is closed
a court lackey and an idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he
waved his arm.
and the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at
his friend in amazement.
those rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski
thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in
which the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with
brilliant light. It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at
"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is
he (though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when he
worked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had
nothing but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself
all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and
torments you with regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and
triviality--these are the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I
am now going to the war, the greatest war there ever was, and I know
nothing and am fit for nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic
wit," continued Prince Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen
to me. And that stupid set without whom my wife cannot exist, and
women in general! My father is right. Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial
colors! When you meet them in society it seems as if there were
consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have
everything before you, everything. And you..."
thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
"How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his
friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the
might be best described as strength of will. Pierre was always
by Andrew's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation (to which he
himself was particularly addicted), he regarded even this not as a
talking about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence,
smiling at his reassuring thoughts.
relaxing into a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate
son!" He suddenly blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a
great effort to say this. "Without a name and without means... And
I am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously."
affectionate as it was--expressed a sense of his own superiority.
"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among
our whole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all
the same. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up
visiting those Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so
badly--all this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"
"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging
his shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"
'women and wine' I don't understand!"
reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.
"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy
such a life I can't decide or think properly about anything. One's
but I won't go."
"You give me your word of honor not to go?"
"On my honor!"
CHAPTER IX
cloudless, northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending
he felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go
there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so
accustomed to that he decided to go. The thought immediately
occurred to him that his promise to Prince Andrew was of no account,
honor' are conventional things with no definite meaning, especially if
the same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort,
stairs, and went in at the open door. There was no one in the
anteroom; empty bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there
was a smell of alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the
distance.
Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet
dispersed. Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in
which were the remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw
third room came sounds of laughter, the shouting of familiar voices,
young men were crowding anxiously round an open window. Three others
were romping with a young bear, one pulling him by the chain and
"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.
"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.
"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands."
"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."
"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.
Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,
and duelist, who was living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about
"I don't understand. What's it all about?"
"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole,
Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows
at the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and
listening to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass
while explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens, an English
naval officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the
outer ledge of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
"Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the last
glass, "or I won't let you go!"
"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up to
distinctly repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself
particularly to Anatole and Pierre.
Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue
eyes. He was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore
was clearly seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely
curved. The middle of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed
played continually round the two corners of the mouth; this,
together with the resolute, insolent intelligence of his eyes,
Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles, Dolokhov lived with him and
had placed himself on such a footing that all who knew them, including
Anatole himself, respected him more than they did Anatole. Dolokhov
could play all games and nearly always won. However much he drank,
he never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kuragin and Dolokhov were at
that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of Petersburg.
The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented
anyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two
and shouts of the gentlemen around.
to smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame,
but could not move it. He smashed a pane.
"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame
out with a crash.
rum in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of
Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the
in the room. All were silent.
imperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he,
addressing the Englishman.
"No, fifty," replied the latter.
rum without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on
this spot" (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the
"Quite right," said the Englishman.
buttons of his coat and looking down at him--the Englishman was short-
began repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.
to attract attention. "Wait a bit, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone else
The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to
accept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and
though he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on
translating Dolokhov's words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar
window sill, leaned over, and looked down.
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the
"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The lad
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it
easily, Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and
adjusted himself on his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the
right and then to the left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought
already quite light. Dolokhov's back in his white shirt, and his curly
than the others present, suddenly pushed forward with a scared and
angry look and wanted to seize hold of Dolokhov's shirt.
Anatole stopped him.
"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed.
Eh?... What then?... Eh?"
"If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words
there. Now then!"
Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the
his free hand to balance himself. One of the footmen who had stooped
stood erect with staring eyes. The Englishman looked on sideways,
though his features now expressed horror and fear. All were still.
Pierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhov still sat in the same
touched his shirt collar, and the hand holding the bottle was lifted
higher and higher and trembled with the effort. The bottle was
yet further back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pierre. It seemed to
him that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made
this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the
sloping ledge. As he began slipping down, his head and arm wavered
still more with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch the
was aware of a stir all around. He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on
the window sill, with a pale but radiant face.
"It's empty."
Dolokhov jumped down. He smelt strongly of rum.
"Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil
take you!" came from different sides.
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the
the window sill.
"Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" he
suddenly cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a
"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.
"I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banging
the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb
out of the window.
who touched him was sent flying.
and I'll get round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, but
now we are all going to ----'s."
us."
ground, and began dancing round the room with it.
CHAPTER X
Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess
the evening of Anna Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the
Semenov Guards with the rank of cornet. He received, however, no
endeavors and entreaties. Soon after Anna Pavlovna's reception Anna
Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went straight to her rich
relations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed when in the town and
where her darling Bory, who had only just entered a regiment
of the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards as a
time. The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August,
and her son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join
them on the march to Radzivilov.
mother and the youngest daughter--both named Nataly. Ever since the
continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova's big house
on the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself
visitors who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one
another in relays.
The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental
type of face, evidently worn out with childbearing--she had had
twelve. A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness,
gave her a distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna
Mikhaylovna Drubetskaya, who as a member of the household was also
count met the guests and saw them off, inviting them all to dinner.
"I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"--he
called everyone without exception and without the slightest
variation in his tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him
in rank--"I thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose
mon cher!" These words he repeated to everyone without exception or
clean-shaven face, the same firm pressure of the hand and the same
to one of those who were still in the drawing room, drew a chair
hands on his knees with the air of a man who enjoys life and knows how
man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment of duty, he rose to see
some visitors off and, stroking his scanty gray hairs over his bald
patch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his way back from the
anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and pantry into the
large marble dining hall, where tables were being set out for eighty
people; and looking at the footmen, who were bringing in silver and
china, moving tables, and unfolding damask table linen, he would
his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table
would say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they
gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room. The
her husband's portrait on it.
"I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and no
delighted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices,
interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and
the scraping of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which
last out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of
Countess Apraksina..." and then, again rustling, pass into the
anteroom, put on cloaks or mantles, and drive away. The conversation
celebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count Bezukhov, and about his
illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at Anna
"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in such
bad health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill
"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the
Count Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times.
"It seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as
he liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible
things that he has been expelled by the police."
"He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Prince
Vasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up
affair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg."
woman, but there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear
somewhere, put it in a carriage, and set off with it to visit some
do? They tied a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear
policeman on his back!"
"Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"
Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.
"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the
visitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who
amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so
well educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has
declined: I have my daughters to consider."
turning away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of
inattention. "His children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also
is illegitimate."
The visitor made a gesture with her hand.
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation,
on in society.
"The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a
half whisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost
count of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite."
count is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to
the Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death--and he is
so ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from
Pierre or Prince Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions of
rubles! I know it all very well for Prince Vasili told me himself.
my Bory's godfather," she added, as if she attached no importance at
"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on
hearing how ill he is."
"But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count;
and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to
the young ladies. "I can just imagine what a funny figure that
form again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who
always eats well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine
Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,
now rose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was already
smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when
suddenly from the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls
running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a
girl of thirteen, hiding something in the folds of her short muslin
frock, darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room. It was
rosy-faced boy in a short jacket.
The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his
"Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess with
feigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turning to her
husband.
addressing the mother.
This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life-
with childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook
that charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child
flushed face in the lace of her mother's mantilla--not paying the
produced from the folds of her frock.
"Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha
managed to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned
against her mother and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter
that even the prim visitor could not help joining in.
"Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the
mother, pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and
glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
necessary to take some part in it.
"Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation of
yours? A daughter, I suppose?"
things. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
Meanwhile the younger generation: Boris, the officer, Anna
Mikhaylovna's son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldest
son; Sonya, the count's fifteen-year-old niece, and little Petya,
his youngest boy, had all settled down in the drawing room and were
obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum the
excitement and mirth that shone in all their faces. Evidently in the
back rooms, from which they had dashed out so impetuously, the
The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from
childhood, were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though
regular, delicate features. Nicholas was short with curly hair and
something to say, but failed. Boris on the contrary at once found
his footing, and related quietly and humorously how he had know that
broken; how she had aged during the five years he had known her, and
glanced at Natasha. She turned away from him and glanced at her
younger brother, who was screwing up his eyes and shaking with
would carry her. Boris did not laugh.
"You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want the
"Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered,
returning his smile.
Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha. The plump
disturbed.
CHAPTER XII
The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting
person), were Nicholas and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slender
long lashes, thick black plaits coiling twice round her head, and a
tawny tint in her complexion and especially in the color of her
pretty, half-grown kitten which promises to become a beautiful
join the army, with such passionate girlish adoration that her smile
could not for a single instant impose upon anyone, and it was clear
that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more energy
and Boris, escape from the drawing room.
"Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor and
pointing to Nicholas, "his friend Boris has become an officer, and
so for friendship's sake he is leaving the university and me, his
was a place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department!
Isn't that friendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone.
"But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor.
they'll say so again and again, and that will be the end of it. My
dear, there's friendship for you," he repeated. "He's joining the
"It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring up and
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were
both regarding him with a smile of approbation.
speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
"I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don't
flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady
The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any
moment to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
"All right, all right!" said the old count. "He always flares up!
This Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he
rose from an ensign and became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it,"
he added, not noticing his visitor's sarcastic smile.
The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karagina turned to
young Rostov.
"What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was so
his talk he glanced round at her. She gave him a passionately angry
glance, and hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the
artificial smile on her lips, she got up and left the room. All
Nicholas' animation vanished. He waited for the first pause in the
sleeves!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went
out. "Cousinage--dangereux voisinage;"* she added.
*Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.
"Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people
so dangerous both for girls and boys."
"It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.
have always, thank God, been my children's friend and had their full
always be my daughters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with
deciding that everything was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be an
"a little volcano!"
"Yes, a regular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! And
what a voice she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truth
when I say she'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an
train it at that age."
countess with a gentle smile, looking at Boris' and went on, evidently
concerned with a thought that always occupied her: "Now you see if I
they might be up to on the sly" (she meant that they would be
kissing), "but as it is, I know every word she utters. She will come
"Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome
elder daughter, Countess Vera, with a smile.
do; on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore
quick at learning, was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what
she said was true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone-
"What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was too
clever with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turned
The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to
when she had seen her guests out.
CHAPTER XIII
When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the
conservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation
among the flower tubs and hid there.
ambush, waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while
before the glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natasha
thought she. Hardly had Boris gone than Sonya, flushed, in tears,
and muttering angrily, came in at the other door. Natasha checked
watching--as under an invisible cap--to see what went on in the world.
She was experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, muttering
running up to her.
"Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!"
"So-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like
that, for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking her hand.
Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natasha, not
stirring and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with
sparkling eyes. "What will happen now?" thought she.
"Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are
everything!" said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."
"I don't like you to talk like that."
and kissed her.
gone out of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her.
"Boris, come here," said she with a sly and significant look. "I
conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.
Boris followed her, smiling.
"What is the something?" asked he.
Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did not
reply.
"Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and went
further in among the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer, closer!"
she whispered.
She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity
and fear appeared on her flushed face.
from excitement.
"How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing still
tossing back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of
the tubs and stood, hanging her head.
"Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another four
years... then I will ask for your hand."
Natasha considered.
"Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender
A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.
"Settled!" replied Boris.
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the
adjoining sitting room.
CHAPTER XIV
gave orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she
returned from Petersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with her tear-worn but
"With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "There
friendship."
Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The countess pressed her
friend's hand.
favorite, "how is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you are
not wanted here? Go to the other girls, or..."
hurt.
"If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone," she replied
as she rose to go to her own room.
But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples
Sonya was sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses
for her, the first he had ever written. Boris and Natasha were at
the other window and ceased talking when Vera entered. Sonya and
Natasha looked at Vera with guilty, happy faces.
"How often have I asked you not to take my things?" she said. "You
have a room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.
"You always manage to do things at the wrong time," continued
Vera. "You came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt
ashamed of you."
Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no
one replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingered
She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to
behaving with Boris."
"Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris. "I have
"Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that it is really
(She used the word "diplomat," which was just then much in vogue among
the children, in the special sense they attached to it.) "Why does she
Madame de Genlis and nothing more" (this nickname, bestowed on Vera by
is to be unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with Berg as much as you
"I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors..."
"Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas--"said
unpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let's go to the
All four, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room.
to anyone."
"Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voices
through the door.
The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant
effect on everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been
said to her, went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and
scarf. Looking at her own handsome face she seemed to become still
colder and calmer.
last long? It's all the Club and his easygoing nature. Even in the
country do we get any rest? Theatricals, hunting, and heaven knows
what besides! But don't let's talk about me; tell me how you managed
rush off alone in a carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those
ministers and great people, and know how to deal with them all! It's
quite astonishing. How did you get things settled? I couldn't possibly
do it."
know what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you
love to distraction! One learns many things then," she added with a
interview with So and-So,' and then I take a cab and go myself two,
three, or four times--till I get what I want. I don't mind what they
think of me."
"Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess.
Nicholas is going as a cadet. There's no one to interest himself for
"To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once agreed to
everything, and put the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna
had endured to gain her end.
"Has Prince Vasili aged much?" asked the countess. "I have not
seen him since we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. I
expect he has forgotten me. He paid me attentions in those days," said
the countess, with a smile.
"overflowing with amiability. His position has not turned his head
at all. He said to me, 'I am sorry I can do so little for you, dear
Princess. I am at your command.' Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very
kind relation. But, Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would do
sadly, dropping her voice. "My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and
penny and don't know how to equip Boris." She took out her
only one twenty-five-ruble note. I am in such a state.... My only hope
his godson--you know he is Bory's godfather--and allow him something
for his maintenance, all my trouble will have been thrown away.... I
shall not be able to equip him."
The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.
"that here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all
alone... that tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It's a
"Surely he will leave something to Boris," said the countess.
Still, I will take Boris and go to see him at once, and I shall
will just be time."
most of time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, and
went into the anteroom with him.
door, and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, "Wish me
count coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added:
"If he is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the
house, you know, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite
him, my dear. We will see how Taras distinguishes himself today. He
says Count Orlov never gave such a dinner as ours will be!"
"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son as
Countess Rostova's carriage in which they were seated drove over the
drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly and
tenderly on her son's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him.
Count Cyril Vladimirovich is your godfather after all, your future
"If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of
it..." answered her son coldly. "But I have promised and will do it
for your sake."
be announced had passed straight through the glass porch between the
rows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady's old
cloak, he asked whether they wanted the count or the princesses,
and, hearing that they wished to see the count, said his excellency
was worse today, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone.
"We may as well go back," said the son in French.
on his arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.
"My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gentle tones, addressing the
why I have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, my
here, is he not? Please announce me."
turned away.
"Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich," he called to
who ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.
The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a
briskly ascended the carpeted stairs.
"My dear," she said to her son, once more stimulating him by a
touch, "you promised me!"
The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.
Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall,
Prince Vasili came out--wearing a velvet coat with a single star on
"Then it is certain?" said the prince.
his r's, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.
*To err is human.
"Very well, very well..."
Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the
suddenly clouded his mother's face, and he smiled slightly.
"Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our
dear invalid?" said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive
Prince Vasili stared at her and at Boris questioningly and
perplexed. Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili without acknowledging
the bow turned to Anna Mikhaylovna, answering her query by a
movement of the head and lips indicating very little hope for the
patient.
"Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! It
is terrible to think.... This is my son," she added, indicating Boris.
Boris bowed again politely.
"I am glad I was able to do you a service, my dear Anna
Mikhaylovna," said Prince Vasili, arranging his lace frill, and in
tone and manner, here in Moscow to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placed
under an obligation, assuming an air of much greater importance than
he had done in Petersburg at Anna Scherer's reception.
Boris with severity. "I am glad.... Are you here on leave?" he went on
in his usual tone of indifference.
"I am awaiting orders to join my new regiment, your excellency,"
replied Boris, betraying neither annoyance at the prince's brusque
quietly and respectfully that the prince gave him a searching glance.
"Are you living with your mother?"
"That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina," said
"I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice. "I
never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
unlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler
"But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a pathetic
smile, as though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure,
doctors say?" asked the princess after a pause, her worn face again
"They give little hope," replied the prince.
and Boris. He is his godson," she added, her tone suggesting that this
fact ought to give Prince Vasili much satisfaction.
Prince Vasili became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna saw
that he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's
"If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle,"
"I know his character: noble, upright... but you see he has no one
with him except the young princesses.... They are still young...." She
he is so ill. We women, Prince," and she smiled tenderly, "always know
how to say these things. I absolutely must see him, however painful it
may be for me. I am used to suffering."
Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he
Mikhaylovna?" said he. "Let us wait until evening. The doctors are
"But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that the
the count's niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length of
at your service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you have
gone through," and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.
as Anna Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position
to take a seat beside her.
"Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see the
count, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile
prince.
"On the contrary," replied the prince, who had plainly become
depressed, "I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young
CHAPTER XVI
Petersburg, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and
sent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostov's was true.
been for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his
who were never favorably disposed toward him--would have used it to
turn the count against him, he nevertheless on the day of his
arrival went to his father's part of the house. Entering the drawing
ladies, two of whom were sitting at embroidery frames while a third
read aloud. It was the eldest who was reading--the one who had met
rosy and pretty and they differed only in that one had a little mole
on her lip which made her much prettier. Pierre was received as if
he were a corpse or a leper. The eldest princess paused in her reading
precisely the same expression; while the youngest, the one with the
frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing scene she
"How do you do, cousin?" said Pierre. "You don't recognize me?"
"I recognize you only too well, too well."
"How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual,
but unabashed.
you have done your best to increase his mental sufferings."
"Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can see
him... Olga, go and see whether Uncle's beef tea is ready--it is
almost time," she added, giving Pierre to understand that they were
Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed
see him."
And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of
the sister with the mole.
He sent for Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you are
going to behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very
badly; that is all I have to say to you. The count is very, very
ill, and you must not see him at all."
time in his rooms upstairs.
When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his
room, stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at
gesticulating.
"England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his finger
rights of man, is sentenced to..." But before Pierre--who at that
London--could pronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a well-built and
handsome young officer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had left
Moscow when Boris was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten
him, but in his usual impulsive and hearty way he took Boris by the
"Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile.
well."
"Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him,"
Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider it
embarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face.
"Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he, after a
considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.
"Ah, Count Rostov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are his
son, Ilya? Only fancy, I didn't know you at first. Do you remember how
age..."
"You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold and
Nicholas. I never knew any Madame Jacquot."
Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.
"Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up. One
expedition? The English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon
Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read
"We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal
than with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone. "I know
nothing about it and have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busy
"Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip," Boris went on.
"Everybody is wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune,
Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently say
changing his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone is
trying to get something out of the rich man?"
"So it does," thought Pierre.
quite mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are
your father is rich, I don't regard myself as a relation of his, and
neither I nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him."
jumped up from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick,
clumsy way, and, blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with a
But Boris again interrupted him.
"I am glad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? You
And Boris, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and
were children. You might think that I... I understand, quite
acquaintance. It's queer," he added after a pause, "that you should
have suspected me!" He began to laugh. "Well, what of it! I hope we'll
get better acquainted," and he pressed Boris' hand. "Do you know, I
am sorry for him as a man, but what can one do?"
Boris with a smile.
Pierre saw that Boris wished to change the subject, and being of the
the Boulogne expedition.
A footman came in to summon Boris--the princess was going. Pierre,
in order to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come to
spectacles into Boris' eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacing
imaginary foe with his imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance
of that pleasant, intelligent, and resolute young man.
As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a
lonely life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man
eyes and her face was tearful.
"It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may
left like this. Every moment is precious. I can't think why his nieces
"Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turning away from her.
"Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mother to her son when
they were in the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anybody."
"I don't understand, Mamma--what is his attitude to Pierre?" asked
the son.
"But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?"
"Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!"
"Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.
CHAPTER XVII
After Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count
Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a long time all
alone applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
"What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid
I'll find you another place."
The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating
poverty, and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with
to her with exaggerated politeness.
"I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.
"Ask the count to come to me."
The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look
have, my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Taras
were not ill-spent. He is worth it!"
He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands
"What are your commands, little countess?"
"Well, you see, Count, I want some money."
Her face became sad.
"Oh, little countess!"... and the count began bustling to get out
"Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out
in a tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call
will rush to obey the summons. "Send Dmitri to me!"
Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the
room.
deferential young man who had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected a
moment, "yes, bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't
ones for the countess."
"Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighing
deeply.
"When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri. "Allow me
to inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing that the
a sign of approaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish it
brought at once?"
"What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smile
when the young man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible'
with him. That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible."
said the countess. "But I am in great need of this sum."
"You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the
When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money,
was agitating her.
"Well, my dear?" asked the countess.
"Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is
so ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."
"Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess began,
elderly face, and she took the money from under the handkerchief.
Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be
ready to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countess
wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
CHAPTER XVIII
Countess Rostova, with her daughters and a large number of guests,
was already seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemen
into his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes.
From time to time he went out to ask: "Hasn't she come yet?" They were
expecting Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as le
terrible dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but
for common sense and frank plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna was
known to the Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and
all without exception respected and feared her.
it had appeared. The count sat on the sofa between two guests who were
smoking and talking. He neither smoked nor talked, but bending his
with evident pleasure and listened to the conversation of his two
neighbors, whom he egged on against each other.
One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and
if quite at home and, having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his
mouth, was inhaling the smoke spasmodically and screwing up his
man with "a sharp tongue" as they said in Moscow society. He seemed to
be condescending to his companion. The latter, a fresh, rosy officer
of the Guards, irreproachably washed, brushed, and buttoned, held
his pipe in the middle of his mouth and with red lips gently inhaled
the smoke, letting it escape from his handsome mouth in rings. This
Boris was to travel to join the army, and about whom Natasha had,
teased her elder sister Vera, speaking of Berg as her "intended."
The count sat between them and listened attentively. His favorite
"Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich,"
l'etat;* you want to make something out of your company?"
"No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry
the advantages are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own
conversation always related entirely to himself; he would remain
calm and silent when the talk related to any topic that had no
direct bearing on himself. He could remain silent for hours without
uncomfortable, but as soon as the conversation concerned himself he
should get not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even
thirty," said he, looking at Shinshin and the count with a joyful,
always be the chief desire of everyone else.
"Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanging into the Guards I
shall be in a more prominent position," continued Berg, "and vacancies
occur much more frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just think what
can be done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put a
little aside and to send something to my father," he went on, emitting
a smoke ring.
"La balance y est...* A German knows how to skin a flint, as the
his mouth and winking at the count.
Shinshin was talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony or
indifference, continued to explain how by exchanging into the Guards
how in wartime the company commander might get killed and he, as
senior in the company, might easily succeed to the post; how popular
he was with everyone in the regiment, and how satisfied his father was
with him. Berg evidently enjoyed narrating all this, and did not
seem to suspect that others, too, might have their own interests.
But all he said was so prettily sedate, and the naivete of his
youthful egotism was so obvious, that he disarmed his hearers.
Berg smiled joyously. The count, by his guests, went into the
It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled
long conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in
one another, and the visitors try to guess from these glances who,
or what, they are waiting for--some important relation who has not yet
arrived, or a dish that is not yet ready.
*Hors d'oeuvres.
Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in
the middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come
him talk, but he went on naively looking around through his spectacles
as if in search of somebody and answered all her questions in
monosyllables. He was in the way and was the only one who did not
policeman.
"You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him.
"You have not yet seen my husband?"
"Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately.
"You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's very
"Very interesting."
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and
answered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The other
guests were all conversing with one another. "The Razumovskis... It
was charming... You are very kind... Countess Apraksina..." was
heard on all sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.
"Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.
entered the room.
rolling them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian.
"Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to
daresay? Nowhere to hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, old
to the girls. "You must look for husbands for them whether you like it
or not...."
Natasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came up
fearless and gay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a scamp of a girl,
but I like her."
She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings from her huge
addressed herself to Pierre.
"Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft high
tone of voice. "Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked up
"Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell
your father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's my
evident duty." She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to
The count went in first with Marya Dmitrievna, the countess followed
on the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them
followed, filling the whole dining hall, and last of all the children,
tutors, and governesses followed singly. The footmen began moving
guests settled down in their places. Then the strains of the count's
household band were replaced by the clatter of knives and forks, the
the table sat the countess with Marya Dmitrievna on her right and Anna
the other end sat the count, with the hussar colonel on his left and
long table on one side sat the grownup young people: Vera beside Berg,
neglecting his own. The countess in turn, without omitting her
duties as hostess, threw significant glances from behind the
pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed by their
end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the men's end
of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so much
tender smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but a
heavenly feeling. Boris was telling his new friend Pierre who the
guests were and exchanging glances with Natasha, who was sitting
went on to the game without omitting a single dish or one of the
wines. These latter the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in
a napkin, from behind the next man's shoulders and whispered: "Dry
the four crystal glasses engraved with the count's monogram that stood
Natasha, who sat opposite, was looking at Boris as girls of thirteen
look at the boy they are in love with and have just kissed for the
first time. Sometimes that same look fell on Pierre, and that funny
lively little girl's look made him inclined to laugh without knowing
why.
Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karagina,
to whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sonya
wore a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now
looking round uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might
be put upon the children. The German tutor was trying to remember
all the dishes, wines, and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full
description of the dinner to his people in Germany; and he felt
greatly offended when the butler with a bottle wrapped in a napkin
passed him by. He frowned, trying to appear as if he did not want
that it was not to quench his thirst or from greediness that he wanted
it, but simply from a conscientious desire for knowledge.
CHAPTER XIX
animated. The colonel told them that the declaration of war had
already appeared in Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself
seen, had that day been forwarded by courier to the commander in
Shinshin. "He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our
turn next."
to the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin's
"It is for the reasson, my goot sir," said he, speaking with a
German accent, "for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He
vell as ze sanctity of its alliances..." he spoke this last word
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he
... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and
new condition for the attainment of that purpose.
wine with dignity and looking to the count for approval.
"Connaissez-vous le Proverbe:* 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but
what he was about; yet they beat him a plate couture,*[3] and where
are we to find Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,"*[4] said he,
continually changing from French to Russian.
*[2] That suits us down to the ground.
all vill pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible"...
ended, again turning to the count. "Zat is how ve old hussars look
at it, and zere's an end of it! And how do you, a young man and a
young hussar, how do you judge of it?" he added, addressing
Nicholas, who when he heard that the war was being discussed had
turned from his partner with eyes and ears intent on the colonel.
"I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up,
turning his plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as
facing some great danger. "I am convinced that we Russians must die or
and down to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.
the table.
table. "What are you thumping the table for?" she demanded of the
"It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "You
know my son's going, Marya Dmitrievna? My son is going."
God's hands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a
"That's true!"
Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one end
"You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was saying; "I know you
won't ask!"
"I will," replied Natasha.
half rose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to
what was coming, and turning to her mother:
"Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,
audible the whole length of the table.
daughter's face that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at her
sternly with a threatening and forbidding movement of her head.
The conversation was hushed.
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Natasha's voice
sounded still more firm and resolute.
her fat finger.
Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at
the elders.
"You had better take care!" said the countess.
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" Natasha again cried
boldly, with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken
in good part.
Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with laughter.
"You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and
to Pierre, glancing at him again.
"Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Marya Dmitrievna.
Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even
Marya Dmitrievna.
"Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don't like ice
cream."
"Carrot ices."
"I want to know!"
guests joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer
but at the incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who
Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would be
pineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The band
again struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests,
leaving their seats, went up to "congratulate" the countess, and
redder faces, the guests returned to the drawing room and to the
count's visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms,
The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty
from dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at
everything. The young people, at the countess' instigation, gathered
round the clavichord and harp. Julie by general request played
first. After she had played a little air with variations on the
harp, she joined the other young ladies in begging Natasha and
Nicholas, who were noted for their musical talent, to sing
evidently very proud of this but at the same time felt shy.
"'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas.
"Well, then, let's be quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "But
where is Sonya?"
She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room
ran to look for her.
Running into Sonya's room and not finding her there, Natasha ran
she must be on the chest in the passage. The chest in the passage
Nurse's dirty feather bed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzy
Natasha's face, which had been so radiantly happy all that saint's
day, suddenly changed: her eyes became fixed, and then a shiver passed
began to wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sonya was
crying. Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, and
hid her face still deeper in the bed. Natasha wept, sitting on the
blue-striped feather bed and hugging her friend. With an effort
Sonya sat up and began wiping her eyes and explaining.
And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.
"It's all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and
there are no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin...
Nicholas' career and am heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God
her? I am so grateful to you that I would willingly sacrifice
Sonya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and in
the feather bed. Natasha began consoling her, but her face showed that
you since dinner? Hasn't she?"
others, and she found them on my table and said she'd show them to
Mamma, and that I was ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him
And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natasha
"Sonya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do you
room after supper? Why, we settled how everything was to be. I don't
quite remember how, but don't you remember that it could all be
arranged and how nice it all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's brother has
married his first cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know.
cry, Sonya, dear love, darling Sonya!" and she kissed her and laughed.
won't say anything to Mamma. Nicholas will tell her himself, and he
doesn't care at all for Julie."
Natasha kissed her on the hair.
"Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoothing her
Both laughed.
"Come along!"
"Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" said
Natasha, stopping suddenly. "I feel so happy!"
Sonya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the
verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran
and light, joyous steps. At the visitors' request the young people
sang the quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delighted.
Then Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
   At nighttime in the moon's fair glow
     How sweet, as fancies wander free,
     Who still is thinking but of thee!
   That while her fingers touch the harp
   It is for thee thus swells her heart,
   A day or two, then bliss unspoilt,
     But oh! till then I cannot live!...
He had not finished the last verse before the young people began
Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged
him, as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political
When the music began Natasha came in and walking straight up to Pierre
"I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied; "but if you
will be my teacher..." And lowering his big arm he offered it to the
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning
grown-up lady. She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had
given her to hold. Assuming quite the pose of a society woman
(heaven knows when and where she had learned it) she talked with her
partner, fanning herself and smiling over the fan.
"Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as she
crossed the ballroom, pointing to Natasha.
surprised at?"
In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs
being pushed back in the sitting room where the count and Marya
after sitting so long, and replacing their purses and pocketbooks,
the first violin:
"Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"
anglaise.)
forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her
laughter.
And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure
at the jovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stout
partner, Marya Dmitrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightened
his shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with his foot,
provocatively gay strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling
those of a merry peasant dance) began to sound, all the doorways of
the ballroom were suddenly filled by the domestic serfs--the men on
one side and the women on the other--who with beaming faces had come
The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did
not want to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, her
dance. What was expressed by the whole of the count's plump figure, in
Marya Dmitrievna found expression only in her more and more beaming
face and quivering nose. But if the count, getting more and more
of his adroit maneuvers and the agility with which he capered about on
his light feet, Marya Dmitrievna produced no less impression by slight
exertions--the least effort to move her shoulders or bend her arms
when turning, or stamp her foot--which everyone appreciated in view of
her size and habitual severity. The dance grew livelier and
livelier. The other couples could not attract a moment's attention
watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha kept pulling everyone
by sleeve or dress, urging them to "look at Papa!" though as it was
musicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster; lightly, more
Dmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until, turning his
partner round to her seat, he executed the final pas, raising his soft
by Natasha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily and wiping
their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.
"That's how we used to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count.
her sleeves and puffing heavily.
mute confession, communion was administered to the dying man,
preparations made for the sacrament of unction, and in his house there
whenever a carriage drove up, waited in expectation of an important
order for an expensive funeral. The Military Governor of Moscow, who
count's health, came himself that evening to bid a last farewell to
the celebrated grandee of Catherine's court, Count Bezukhov.
The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood up
hour alone with the dying man, passed out, slightly acknowledging
their bows and trying to escape as quickly as from the glances fixed
on him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Prince
Vasili, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,
in low tones.
When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down all
other, leaning his elbow on his knee and covering his face with his
hand. After sitting so for a while he rose, and, looking about him
with frightened eyes, went with unusually hurried steps down the
long corridor leading to the back of the house, to the room of the
Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous
man's room, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or
"The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed,"
said an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was
listening naively to his words.
"I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the
lady, adding the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion
of her own on the subject.
"Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament," replied the priest, passing
his hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his
"Who was that? The Military Governor himself?" was being asked at
the other side of the room. "How young-looking he is!"
anyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction."
"I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times."
The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes
table.
weather. "The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow
one feels as if one were in the country."
something to drink?"
Lorrain considered.
"Has he taken his medicine?"
"Yes."
"Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar,"
aide-de-camp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke."
"And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp.
"And who will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper.
Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second
addressing Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.
Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger
before his nose.
"Tonight, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with
a decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to
understand and state the patient's condition.
Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.
In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burning
feather bed was just visible behind a screen. A small dog began to
She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely
smooth that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and
covered with varnish.
"Has anything happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified."
"No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk about
the chair she had just vacated. "You have made the place warm, I
*Catherine.
prince, she prepared to listen.
"Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bending
it downwards as was his habit.
It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they both
her legs, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion
at the icons with a sigh. This might have been taken as an
"And I?" he said; "do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn
out as a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a
very serious talk."
Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously,
expression which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His
eyes too seemed strange; at one moment they looked impudently sly
The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony
hands, looked attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolved
not to be the first to break silence, if she had to wait till morning.
"Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semenovna,"
without an inner struggle; "at such a moment as this one must think of
you all, like children of my own, as you know."
The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with the
"And then of course my family has also to be considered," Prince
Vasili went on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at
my wife--are the count's only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard it
but, my dear, I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for
anything. Do you know I have sent for Pierre? The count," pointing
to his portrait, "definitely demanded that he should be called."
Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could not
make out whether she was considering what he had just said or
"There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin," she
replied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow
his noble soul peacefully to leave this..."
"Yes, yes, of course," interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently,
left all his property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre."
cannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate."
"But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the little
a letter has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for
Pierre's legitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of
The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about
the subject under discussion than those they are talking with.
"I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand,
"that letter was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knew
then as soon as all is over," and Prince Vasili sighed to intimate
what he meant by the words all is over, "and the count's papers are
opened, the will and letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and
the petition will certainly be granted. Pierre will get everything
as the legitimate son."
"And our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as if
because..."
"What next?" the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and
not changing the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and you
think we are all stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot
inherit... un batard!"* she added, as if supposing that this
invalidity of his contention.
intelligent, how is it you don't see that if the count has written a
letter to the Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate,
it follows that Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count
but the consolation of having been dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit!*
That's certain."
*And all that follows therefrom.
princess with the expression women assume when they suppose they are
saying something witty and stinging.
"My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," began Prince Vasili
impatiently, "I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about
tell you for the tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and
the will in Pierre's favor are among the count's papers, then, my dear
girl, you and your sisters are not heiresses! If you don't believe me,
(the family solicitor) "and he says the same."
At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas;
her thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her
voice when she began to speak passed through such transitions as she
herself evidently did not expect.
"That would be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and
She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.
"And this is gratitude--this is recognition for those who have
sacrificed everything for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid!
"Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..."
replied Prince Vasili.
But the princess did not listen to him.
ingratitude--the blackest ingratitude--in this house..."
"Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Prince
Vasili, his cheeks twitching more than ever.
She had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole
was all done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was
afterwards forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to
ease his last moments by not letting him commit this injustice, and
not to let him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who..."
would again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though
he never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a
reward, that in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this
"No, I have a wicked heart."
"I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship
and wish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself,
be it but an hour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and above
all where it is. You must know. We will take it at once and show it to
the count. He has, no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it.
You understand that my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his
the princess.
"That's not the point, my dear."
Anna Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the
especially about Sophie--I can't repeat them--that it made the count
then he wrote this vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was
invalid."
"We've got to it at last--why did you not tell me about it sooner?"
said the princess, ignoring his question. "Now I know! Yes; if I
have a sin, a great sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almost
worming herself in here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind.
The time will come!"
the princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent
for) and Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him)
was driving into the court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels
having turned with words of comfort to her companion, realized that he
was asleep in his corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre
followed Anna Mikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then began
to think of the interview with his dying father which awaited him.
He noticed that they had not come to the front entrance but to the
back door. While he was getting down from the carriage steps two
men, who looked like tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and
on both sides. But neither Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the
them. "It seems to be all right," Pierre concluded, and followed
staircase, calling to Pierre, who was lagging behind, to follow.
count at all, still less why he had to go by the back stairs, yet
judging by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assurance and haste, Pierre
concluded that it was all absolutely necessary. Halfway up the
pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass
and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there.
"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were
now permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."
reached the landing. "I'd better go to my own room."
son's when speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no
less than you do, but be a man!"
you. Think that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death."
She sighed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust
yourself to me, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests."
had to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who
was already opening a door.
This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the
in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
these rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
with a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the
princess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage. The
first door on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The maid
with the decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything
Prince Vasili and the eldest princess were sitting close together
talking. Seeing them pass, Prince Vasili drew back with obvious
impatience, while the princess jumped up and with a gesture of
desperation slammed the door with all her might.
depicted on Prince Vasili's face so out of keeping with his dignity
that Pierre stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his
and sighed, as if to say that this was no more than she had expected.
reply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.
Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what
"watching over his interests" meant, but he decided that all these
things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly lit
sumptuous but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front
approach, but even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and
water had been spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a
censer and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them.
another. All became silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn
who, hanging his head, meekly followed her.
decisive moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg
lady she now, keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even
more boldly than that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her
the person the dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured.
not exactly bowing yet seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and
respectfully received the blessing first of one and then of another
priest.
priests; "all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young man
is the count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"
there any hope?"
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved
and tenderly sad voice, she said:
"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit
was watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind
Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly,
moved toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna
had disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned
that they whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him
with a kind of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had
aide-de-camp picked up and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the
make way for him. At first Pierre wished to take another seat so as
not to trouble the lady, and also to pick up the glove himself and
once he felt that this would not do, and that tonight he was a
person obliged to perform some sort of awful rite which everyone
expected of him, and that he was therefore bound to accept their
sat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge hands symmetrically
decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
majestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three
noticed Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never
used to do), and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain
whether it was firmly fixed on.
well!" and he turned to go.
But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated,
not knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the
Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"
illness. Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and went
through the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
whole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him,
and the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the
door. Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about,
and at last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale but
on the arm said:
"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission
to enter that room.
Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its
columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side
illuminated with red light like a Russian church during evening
familiar, majestic figure of his father, Count Bezukhov, with that
lion, and the deep characteristically noble wrinkles of his
handsome, ruddy face. He lay just under the icons; his large thick
downwards, a wax taper had been thrust between forefinger and thumb,
and an old servant, bending over from behind the chair, held it in
their magnificent glittering vestments, with lighted tapers in their
them stood the two younger princesses holding handkerchiefs to their
vicious and determined look steadily fixed on the icons, as though
declaring to all that she could not answer for herself should she
glance round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek, sorrowful, and
strange lady. Prince Vasili in front of the door, near the invalid
carved back of a velvet chair he had turned round for the purpose, and
was crossing himself with his right hand, turning his eyes upward each
sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so much the worse for you!"
Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants;
the men and women had separated as in church. All were silently
crossing themselves, and the reading of the church service, the
Mikhaylovna, with an air of importance that showed that she felt she
quite knew what she was about, went across the room to where Pierre
was standing and gave him a taper. He lit it and, distracted by
observing those around him, began crossing himself with the hand
Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the
mole, watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and
out of temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In
the midst of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased,
they whispered to one another, and the old servant who was holding the
count's hand got up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovna
stepped forward and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to
Lorrain from behind her back. The French doctor held no taper; he
was leaning against one of the columns in a respectful attitude
implying that he, a foreigner, in spite of all differences of faith,
even approved of it. He now approached the sick man with the noiseless
raised from the green quilt the hand that was free, and turning
something to drink, there was a stir around him, then the people
resumed their places and the service continued. During this interval
been leaning, and--with air which intimated that he knew what he was
where stood the high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leaving the
returned to their places one after the other before the service was
concluded. Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to
the rest of what went on, having made up his mind once for all that
what he saw happening around him that evening was in some way
essential.
was heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received
the sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as
before. Around him everyone began to stir: steps were audible and
whispers, among which Anna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.
"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be
impossible..."
The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and
with its gray mane--which, though he saw other faces as well, he had
not lost sight of for a single moment during the whole service. He
"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the
Here!" exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the
bearers and the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the
weight they were carrying were too much for them.
man he caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the
raised by those who were holding him under the armpits, and of his
gray, curly, leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow
and cheekbones, its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic
same as Pierre remembered it three months before, when the count had
sent him to Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly
After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who
Pierre's hand and said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on
which the sick man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the
ceremony just completed. He lay with his head propped high on the
pillows. His hands were symmetrically placed on the green silk
quilt, the palms downward. When Pierre came up the count was gazing
straight at him, but with a look the significance of which could not
be understood by mortal man. Either this look meant nothing but that
much. Pierre hesitated, not knowing what to do, and glanced
touch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed his lips to the
large boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a single muscle of
the count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked questioningly at
with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed. Pierre
symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed that
at the spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna
pathetic importance of these last moments of meeting between the
seemed an hour. Suddenly the broad muscles and lines of the count's
face began to twitch. The twitching increased, the handsome mouth
eyes, trying to guess what he wanted; she pointed first to Pierre,
then to some drink, then named Prince Vasili in an inquiring
whisper, then pointed to the quilt. The eyes and face of the sick
man showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant who
"Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up
to turn the count's heavy body toward the wall.
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward.
Whether he noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded
that lifeless arm, or whether some other thought flitted across his
terror-stricken face, and again at the arm, and on his face a
feeble, piteous smile appeared, quite out of keeping with his
features, that seemed to deride his own helplessness. At sight of this
in his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. The sick man was turned on
"He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of the
princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."
Pierre went out.
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili
and the eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of
Catherine the Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre
and his companion they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the
Prince Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go and take something, my poor
To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic
of this delicious Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air of
restrained animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese
handleless cup before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid
and little tables. During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not
know how to dance, had liked sitting in this room to watch the
ladies who, as they passed through in their ball dresses with diamonds
brilliantly lighted mirrors which repeated their reflections several
times. Now this same room was dimly lighted by two candles. On one
merrymaking, but somberly whispering, and betraying by every word
and movement that they none of them forgot what was happening and what
monitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoe to the
short interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside
"Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not
"But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but
impressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other
when he needs repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul
Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar
attitude, with one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which
were so flabby that they looked heavier below, were twitching
violently; but he wore the air of a man little concerned in what the
two ladies were saying.
"Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases.
"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of the
two ladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid
portfolio she held in her hand. "All I know is that his real will is
in his writing table, and this is a paper he has forgotten...."
She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to
bar her path.
portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily.
vous en conjure..."
portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if the
none of its honeyed firmness and softness.
"Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place
"Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so
interfere, making a scene on the very threshold of a dying man's room?
portfolio.
But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold
on the portfolio, and changed her grip.
Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise,
"this is absurd! Come, let go I tell you."
The princess let go.
"Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will
go and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?"
"But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn
sacrament, allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your
opinion," said she, turning to the young man who, having come quite
close, was gazing with astonishment at the angry face of the
princess which had lost all dignity, and at the twitching cheeks of
Prince Vasili.
"Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Prince
Vasili severely. "You don't know what you are doing."
Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.
At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so
long and which had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and
banged against the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed
"What are you doing!" she cried vehemently. "He is dying and you
quickly caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom.
The eldest princess and Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followed
"Yes, now you may be glad!" said she; "this is what you have been
waiting for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
handkerchief and rushed from the room.
Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre
Pierre noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as
if in an ague.
was in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in
it before. "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I
am near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all!
Death is awful..." and he burst into tears.
Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow,
quiet steps.
forehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:
"He is no more...."
"Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as
could see his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned
he was fast asleep with his head on his arm.
"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you.
But God will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in
command of an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I
been there, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle
promised me only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris. But
he had no time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your
father's wish?"
Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in the
morning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details
edifying. As to the last meeting between father and son, it was so
touching that she could not think of it without tears, and did not
know which had behaved better during those awful moments--the father
spoken such pathetic words to the son, or Pierre, whom it had been
pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief, though he tried hard to
it does one good. It uplifts the soul to see such men as the old count
and as a great secret.
At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the
this expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the
(nicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia") ever since the Emperor
Bourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to the
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that
anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from
Moscow to Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. He
used to say that there are only two sources of human vice--idleness
and superstition, and only two virtues--activity and intelligence.
till she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time
was occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs,
solving problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe,
always going on at his estate. As regularity is a prime condition
facilitating activity, regularity in his household was carried to
the prince was sharp and invariably exacting, so that without being
a hardhearted man he inspired such fear and respect as few hardhearted
men would have aroused. Although he was in retirement and had now no
influence in political affairs, every high official appointed to the
punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in this antechamber
experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when the
enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive,
Princess Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed
for the morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and
repeating a silent prayer. Every morning she came in like that, and
every morning prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose
timidly opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused
at the entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after
glancing round continued his work.
large table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-fronted
standing up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with
the firm pressure of the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince
still possessed the tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age.
After a few more turns of the lathe he removed his foot from the
pedal, wiped his chisel, dropped it into a leather pouch attached to
the lathe, and, approaching the table, summoned his daughter. He never
cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding her tenderly and attentively,
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the
princess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.
"From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his
"Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid glance and
the prince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read the
third!"
him the exercise book containing geometrical figures.
so that she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of
The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyes
glittering close to her; the red patches on her face came and went,
that her fear would prevent her understanding any of her father's
further explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was
the teacher's fault or the pupil's, this same thing happened every
day: the princess' eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear
close to her, of his breath and the smell of him, and could think only
of how to get away quickly to her own room to make out the problem
in peace. The old man was beside himself: moved the chair on which
he was sitting noisily backward and forward, made efforts to control
himself and not become vehement, but almost always did become
aside and turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up
He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.
having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's
lesson, was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam!
I don't want to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and
you'll like it," and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all the
nonsense out of your head."
She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared
face yet plainer. She sat down at her writing table, on which stood
geometry book and eagerly broke the seal of her letter. It was from
who had been at the Rostovs' name-day party.
Julie wrote in French:
Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is
separation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half my
happiness are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance
around me I cannot overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in
Why cannot I now, as three months ago, draw fresh moral strength
from your look, so gentle, calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so
well and seem to see before me as I write?
Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the
hopelessness at her reflection in the glass. "She flatters me,"
thought the princess, turning away and continuing to read. But Julie
that of beauty. But the princess never saw the beautiful expression of
her own eyes--the look they had when she was not thinking of
herself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forced unnatural
All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is
already abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on
their march to the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg
and it is thought intends to expose his precious person to the chances
peace of Europe may be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the
of my brothers, this war has deprived me of one of the associations
enthusiasm could not bear to remain inactive and has left the
university to join the army. I will confess to you, dear Mary, that in
spite of his extreme youth his departure for the army was a great
grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you last summer, is so
noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which one seldom finds
nowadays among our old men of twenty and, particularly, he is so frank
and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that my relations with
him, transient as they were, have been one of the sweetest comforts to
my poor heart, which has already suffered so much. Someday I will tell
you about our parting and all that was said then. That is still too
fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know these poignant
joys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are generally
and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough of this!
The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of old
have received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is Monsieur
recognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and
possessor of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince
Vasili played a very despicable part in this affair and that he
returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen.
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of
we all used to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count
Bezukhov and the owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I
mammas burdened by marriageable daughters, and of the young ladies
themselves, toward him, though, between you and me, he always seemed
to me a poor sort of fellow. As for the past two years people have
the future Countess Bezukhova. But you will understand that I have
while ago that universal auntie Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under the
seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of marriage for you. It is neither
more nor less than with Prince Vasili's son Anatole, whom they wish to
reform by marrying him to someone rich and distinguee, and it is on
you that his relations' choice has fallen. I don't know what you
will think of it, but I consider it my duty to let you know of it.
But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper,
and Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'. Read the
mystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here.
Though there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to
grasp, it is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul.
Adieu! Give my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments
to Mademoiselle Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.
she suddenly rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She
took a sheet of paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is
Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great
delight. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual
if I dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me?
do you suppose that I should look severely on your affection for
that young man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I
cannot approve of them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me
that Christian love, love of one's neighbor, love of one's enemy, is
worthier, sweeter, and better than the feelings which the beautiful
The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and
my father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last
late as possible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!
I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He
friend, our divine Saviour's words, that it is easier for a camel to
go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the
most on earth, it would be to be poorer than the poorest beggar. A
cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend time in reading
what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit. I never
minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their doubts
quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read the
contain; for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the
terrible and holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this
flesh which forms an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let
we let our feeble human minds roam, the better we shall please God,
who rejects all knowledge that does not come from Him; and the less we
that he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince
Vasili. In regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you,
to which we must conform. However painful it may be to me, should
the Almighty lay the duties of wife and mother upon me I
shall try to perform them as faithfully as I can, without
disquieting myself by examining my feelings toward him whom He may
war into which we have been drawn, God knows how or why. Not only
where you are--at the heart of affairs and of the world--is the talk
all of war, even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature--which
heard and painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches and
countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day
before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I
have seen the state of the mothers, wives, and children of the men who
were going and should have heard the sobs. It seems as though
Holy Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!
MARY
"Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already
Mademoiselle Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and
lighthearted, and self-satisfied.
exaggerated grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael
warn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge
minutes late in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the
sitting room with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock,
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the
passages--twenty times repeated--of a sonata by Dussek.
wife to alight, and let her pass into the house before him. Old
Tikhon, wearing a wig, put his head out of the door of the
antechamber, reported in a whisper that the prince was sleeping, and
nor any other unusual event must be allowed to disturb the appointed
order of the day. Prince Andrew apparently knew this as well as
and her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak
just as merrily and prettily as ever.
"Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, looking around
with the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball.
"Let's come, quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smiled at
"Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.
kissed his hand.
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord
rushed out apparently beside herself with delight.
"Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must let
her know."
little princess, kissing her. "I know you already through my
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the
sound of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the
had only met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in each
other's arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they
happened to touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her
seized each other's hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and
again began kissing each other on the face, and then to Prince
Andrew's surprise both began to cry and kissed again. Mademoiselle
Bourienne also began to cry. Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease,
apparently it never entered their heads that it could have been
otherwise at this meeting.
laughed. "I dreamed last night..."--"You were not expecting us?..."-
"Ah! Mary, you have got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!..."
"And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another,
and he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess
Mary had turned toward her brother, and through her tears the
at that moment, rested on Prince Andrew's face.
The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip
continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary
had had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in
have to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that
Mary was still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful
eyes were full of love and sadness. It was plain that she was
following a train of thought independent of her sister-in-law's words.
addressed her brother:
"He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have had
promotion..."
thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her
figure.
The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said:
"Yes, quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."
and unexpectedly again began to cry.
"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise?
Take her to your room and I'll go to Father. How is he? Just the
same?"
"Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what your opinion will be,"
answered the princess joyfully.
"And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the
old prince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his
father. The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor
of his son's arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments
when Prince Andrew entered his father's dressing room (not with the
contemptuous look and manner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the
animated face with which he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting
on a large leather-covered chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle,
entrusting his head to Tikhon.
"Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the old
man, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon was
holding fast to plait, would allow.
this he'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he
held out his cheek.
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He
used to say that a nap "after dinner was silver--before dinner,
thick, bushy eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father
on the spot indicated to him. He made no reply on his father's
favorite topic--making fun of the military men of the day, and more
"Yes, Father, I have come come to you and brought my wife who is
pregnant," said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his
"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy
from morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well."
returning to his hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you to
fight Bonaparte by this new science you call 'strategy.'"
Prince Andrew smiled.
"Give me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile
that showed that his father's foibles did not prevent his son from
loving and honoring him. "Why, I have not yet had time to settle
"Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to
see whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand.
"The house for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there
their woman's way! I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. About
neutral... I know that. What about Austria?" said he, rising from
his chair and pacing up and down the room followed by Tikhon, who
Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began--at first
reluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from
habit changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on-
to explain the plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explained
how an army, ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as
to bring her out of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part
of that army was to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two
interest during this explanation, but as if he were not listening to
it continued to dress while walking about, and three times
This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he
wanted. Another time he interrupted, saying:
reproachfully said: "That's bad! Go on, go on."
age: "Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra."*
"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only
telling you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now,
not worse than this one."
meditatively and rapidly:
"Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room."
dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who
certainly not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who
unexpectedly selected Michael Ivanovich (who always went into a corner
that all men are equals, and had more than once impressed on his
daughter that Michael Ivanovich was "not a whit worse than you or
I." At dinner the prince usually spoke to the taciturn Michael
In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was
exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen--one
signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the
a large gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of
the Princes Bolkonski, opposite which hung another such frame with a
descendant of Rurik and ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew,
man laughs who looks at a portrait so characteristic of the original
as to be amusing.
"How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had
understand what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired
"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew.
"Fancy, with his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were
as was his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of
great clock struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from
the drawing room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes
from under their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and
enters, the sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired
on the back of her neck.
"I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into
her eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit
down, sit down! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"
He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips
only and not with his eyes.
"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he
said.
The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She
was silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father,
and she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual
acquaintances, and she became still more animated and chattered away
giving him greetings from various people and retailing the town
gossip.
"Countess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has
sternly, and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had
Ivanovich.
"Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of
it. Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been telling
me what forces are being collected against him! While you and I
never thought much of him."
Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such
things about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a
peg on which to hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked
the architect.
And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and
the generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced
the A B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an
insignificant little Frenchy, successful only because there were no
real war, but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day
were playing, pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily
bore with his father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and
listened to him with evident pleasure.
"The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorov
himself fall into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not
"Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerked
have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had the
the devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what those
your generals won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll have to call
in the French, so that birds of a feather may fight together. The
German, Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to fetch the
to Moreau to enter the Russian service.... "Wonderful!... Were the
Potemkins, Suvorovs, and Orlovs Germans? No, lad, either you fellows
have all lost your wits, or I have outlived mine. May God help you,
but we'll see what will happen. Buonaparte has become a great
"I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince
"Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busy
with his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't I tell you
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.
"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got
splendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only
idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began
everybody has beaten the Germans. They beat no one--except one
another. He made his reputation fighting them."
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to
He listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how
know and discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European
military and political events.
"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state
sleep at night. Come now, where has this great commander of yours
shown his skill?" he concluded.
"That would take too long to tell," answered the son.
"Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here's
exclaimed in excellent French.
"You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of
am afraid of him."
"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.
CHAPTER XXVIII
princess was in her sister-in-law's room. Prince Andrew in a traveling
coat without epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms
assigned to him. After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing
the trunks put in, he ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those
things he always kept with him remained in his room; a small box, a
of Ochakov. All these traveling effects of Prince Andrew's were in
very good order: new, clean, and in cloth covers carefully tied with
tapes.
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men
capable of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At
Andrew's face looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind
him he paced briskly from corner to corner of the room, looking
straight before him and thoughtfully shaking his head. Did he fear
going to the war, or was he sad at leaving his wife?--perhaps both,
but evidently he did not wish to be seen in that mood, for hearing
footsteps in the passage he hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped
at a table as if tying the cover of the small box, and assumed his
"I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (she
had apparently been running), "and I did so wish to have another
strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be
childhood.
smile.
"She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room.
Oh, Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting
down on the sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child: such a
dear, merry child. I have grown so fond of her."
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical
and contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.
"One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from
them, Andrew? Don't forget that she has grown up and been educated
in society, and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter
condition! It's very hard."
*To understand all is to forgive all.
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at
"You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he
"I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other
life, all alone--for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know what
"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince
Andrew.
even more so. I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She
and kind, because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne
says: 'We don't love people so much for the good they have done us, as
for the good we have done them.' Father took her when she was homeless
after losing her own father. She is very good-natured, and my father
likes her way of reading. She reads to him in the evenings and reads
"To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimes
makes things trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked
"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's getting
intellectual pride," said the princess, following the train of her own
happy as I am."
"The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,
is as clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing
powder," said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
Andrew..." she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a
"What is it, dear?"
"No--promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble
Andrusha!..." said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet
the subject of her request and must not be shown before the request
was granted.
"Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew,
as if guessing what it was about.
"Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as
you please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, our
grandfather, wore it in all his wars." (She still did not take out
what she was holding in her reticule.) "So you promise?"
"Of course. What is it?"
"Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will
never take it off. Do you promise?"
To please you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing the
pained expression his joke had brought to his sister's face, he
repented and added: "I am glad; really, dear, I am very glad."
you to Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in a
voice trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before
in a gold setting, on a finely wrought silver chain.
She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew.
"Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."
lit up the whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her
brother would have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew
tenderness, for he was touched, but also a gleam of irony on his face.
always used to be. Don't judge Lise harshly," she began. "She is so
sweet, so good-natured, and her position now is a very hard one."
blamed her. Why do you say all this to me?"
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as
if she felt guilty.
"I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to.
to say something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: the
little princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her
forebodings about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had
whatever circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the
truth... if you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No!
her head toward the darkness of the open doorway.
in a moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, take
these away. Put this on the seat and this to the right."
"Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him
to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have
"Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "Go, Masha; I'll come
immediately."
On the way to his sister's room, in the passage which connected
one wing with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne
smiling sweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic
blushing and dropping her eyes.
suddenly came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at
reached his sister's room his wife was already awake and her merry
voice, hurrying one word after another, came through the open door.
She was speaking as usual in French, and as if after long
self-restraint she wished to make up for lost time.
mouth full of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat old
This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same laugh
Prince Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of
others some five times. He entered the room softly. The little
princess, plump and rosy, was sitting in an easy chair with her work
in her hands, talking incessantly, repeating Petersburg
reminiscences and even phrases. Prince Andrew came up, stroked her
him and continued her chatter.
The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch. It was an autumn
night, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole.
house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows. The
domestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid good-by to
the reception hall: Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Princess Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been
called to his father's study as the latter wished to say good-by to
him alone. All were waiting for them to come out.
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age
spectacles and white dressing gown, in which he received no one but
his son, sat at the table writing. He glanced round.
"Going?" And he went on writing.
"I've come to say good-by."
strings. The Service before everything. Thanks, thanks!" And he went
on writing, so that his quill spluttered and squeaked. "If you have
anything to say, say it. These two things can be done together," he
"About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your
hands..."
"Why talk nonsense? Say what you want."
"When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur....
The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixed
"I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work," said
Prince Andrew, evidently confused. "I know that out of a million cases
telling her things. She has had a dream and is frightened."
"Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what
he was writing. "I'll do it."
laugh.
"It's a bad business, eh?"
"What is bad, Father?"
"The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly.
"I don't understand!" said Prince Andrew.
know it yourself."
through him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.
The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him.
"What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything. Make your
mind easy," said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
have written that he should make use of you in proper places and not
keep you long as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember
He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his
son was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised
the lid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled
"I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;
hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond
and a letter; it is a premium for the man who writes a history of
to read when I am gone. You will find them useful."
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long
time yet. He felt that he must not say it.
"I will do it all, Father," he said.
"Well, now, good-by!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced
querulous voice suddenly shrieked: "but if I hear that you have not
behaved like a son of Nicholas Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!"
smile.
The old man was silent.
"I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm
killed and if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you-
as I said yesterday... let him grow up with you.... Please."
the old prince's face.
"We've said good-by. Go!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, angry
voice, opening his door.
"What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they saw for a moment
at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white
"Well!" he said, turning to his wife.
"Now go through your performance."
looking with dismay at her husband.
He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.
"Adieu, Mary," said he gently to his sister, taking her by the
The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne
which Prince Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his
direction. From the study, like pistol shots, came the frequent
sound of the old man angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Prince
"Gone? That's all right!" said he; and looking angrily at the
the door.
CHAPTER I
In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and
arriving from Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and
burdening the inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was the
headquarters of the commander-in-chief, Kutuzov.
On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just
reached Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be
of the locality and surroundings--fruit gardens, stone fences, tiled
roofs, and hills in the distance--and despite the fact that the
inhabitants (who gazed with curiosity at the soldiers) were not
Russians, the regiment had just the appearance of any Russian regiment
preparing for an inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.
On the evening of the last day's march an order had been received
commander, and the question arose whether the troops were to be in
battalion commanders to present the regiment in parade order, on the
enough." So the soldiers, after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending
and cleaning all night long without closing their eyes, while the
adjutants and company commanders calculated and reckoned, and by
had been on its last march the day before--presented a well-ordered
And not only externally was all in order, but had it pleased the
commander in chief to look under the uniforms he would have found on
articles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers say. There was only
the state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men's boots
regimental commander, for in spite of repeated demands boots had not
some seven hundred miles.
The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and
thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider
from chest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-new
uniform showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold
epaulettes which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive
shoulders. He had the air of a man happily performing one of the
most solemn duties of his life. He walked about in front of the line
and at every step pulled himself up, slightly arching his back. It was
plain that the commander admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and
that his whole mind was engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to
indicate that, besides military matters, social interests and the fair
sex occupied no small part of his thoughts.
that they both felt happy). "We had our hands full last night.
However, I think the regiment is not a bad one, eh?"
At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had
been posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an
The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been
clearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander in chief
whatever.
A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the
this junction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of
his view, to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which the
commander in chief would be. Though the aide-de-camp did not know
these circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order that
that the commander in chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On
hearing this the regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged
"A fine mess we've made of it!" he remarked.
said 'on the march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfully
to the battalion commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, stepping
resolutely forward. "Company commanders!" he shouted in a voice
accustomed to command. "Sergeants major!... How soon will he be here?"
he asked the aide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidently
relating to the personage he was referring to.
"I don't know, General...."
The regimental commander, going up to the line himself, ordered
ran off to their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the
pulling the straps over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and
drawing the sleeves on with upraised arms.
distance.
commander to the general... third company to the commander." The words
passed along the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing
officer.
appeared from behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged
man and not in the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on
learned. Spots appeared on his nose, the redness of which was
evidently due to intemperance, and his mouth twitched nervously. The
"You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?"
shouted the regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw and
pointing at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat
of bluish cloth, which contrasted with the others. "What have you been
after? The commander in chief is expected and you leave your place?
The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,
"Well, why don't you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as
a Hungarian?" said the commander with an austere gibe.
"Your excellency..."
excellency?... nobody knows."
"Your excellency, it's the officer Dolokhov, who has been reduced to
the ranks," said the captain softly.
"Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier?
regimental commander cooling down a little. "Leave indeed.... One says
a word to you and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "I
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his
jerky steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display
of anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further
badge, at another because his line was not straight, he reached the
third company.
were still five men between him and Dolokhov with his bluish-gray
uniform.
Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with
his clear, insolent eyes in the general's face.
"Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change his
"General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..."
Dolokhov hurriedly interrupted.
tones.
The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general became
silent, angrily pulling down his tight scarf.
he turned away.
"He's coming!" shouted the signaler at that moment.
countenance, opening his mouth awry, prepared to shout. The regiment
fluttered like a bird preening its plumage and became motionless.
"Att-ention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking
and welcome for the approaching chief.
Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a
high, light blue Viennese caleche, slightly creaking on its springs
the suite and a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian
general, in a white uniform that looked strange among the Russian
black ones. The caleche stopped in front of the regiment. Kutuzov
and the Austrian general were talking in low voices and Kutuzov smiled
slightly as treading heavily he stepped down from the carriage just as
if those two thousand men breathlessly gazing at him and the
The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as
with a jingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence
the feeble voice of the commander in chief was heard. The regiment
roared, "Health to your ex... len... len... lency!" and again all
became silent. At first Kutuzov stood still while the regiment
moved; then he and the general in white, accompanied by the suite,
bending forward and hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and
commander in chief, it was evident that he performed his duty as a
Thanks to the strictness and assiduity of its commander the
stragglers. Everything was in good order except the boots.
Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few
sometimes also to the soldiers. Looking at their boots he several
general with an expression which seemed to say that he was not blaming
Behind Kutuzov, at a distance that allowed every softly spoken word to
be heard, followed some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen
talked among themselves and sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to the
commander in chief walked a handsome adjutant. This was Prince
extremely stout, with a kindly, smiling, handsome face and moist eyes.
officer who walked beside him. This hussar, with a grave face and
without a smile or a change in the expression of his fixed eyes,
watched the regimental commander's back and mimicked his every
movement. Each time the commander started and bent forward, the hussar
started and bent forward in exactly the same manner. Nesvitski laughed
and nudged the others to make them look at the wag.
were starting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching the
third company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected
this, involuntarily came closer to him.
"Ah, Timokhin!" said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had
been reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.
One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself
and so Kutuzov, who evidently understood his case and wished him
nothing but good, quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile
hussar officer as in a looking glass--started, moved forward, and
and did not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of
laughing. Kutuzov turned round. The officer evidently had complete
control of his face, and while Kutuzov was turning managed to make a
The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparently
"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to the
ranks in this regiment."
"Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.
Dolokhov, who had already changed into a soldier's gray greatcoat,
soldier, with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks,
went up to the commander in chief, and presented arms.
"Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a slight frown.
"Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your
duty. The Emperor is gracious, and I shan't forget you if you
boldly as they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by
their expression to tear open the veil of convention that separates
a commander in chief so widely from a private.
"One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm,
Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he had
turned from Captain Timokhin again flitted over his face. He turned
to him and everything he could say had long been known to him, that he
was weary of it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away
and went to the carriage.
The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their
appointed quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and
clothes and to rest after their hard marches.
"You won't bear me a grudge, Prokhor Ignatych?" said the
regimental commander, overtaking the third company on its way to its
quarters and riding up to Captain Timokhin who was walking in front.
over beamed with irrepressible delight.) "It's in the Emperor's
service... it can't be helped... one is sometimes a bit hasty on
pleased!" And he held out his hand to the captain.
"Don't mention it, General, as if I'd be so bold!" replied the
captain, his nose growing redder as he gave a smile which showed where
two front teeth were missing that had been knocked out by the butt end
"And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't forget him--he may be quite
excellency; but his character..." said Timokhin.
"And what about his character?" asked the regimental commander.
he is sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he's a
wild beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew."
must have pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has important
"Well, of course, of course!"
reining in his horse, said to him:
"After the next affair... epaulettes."
mocking smile on his lips change.
hear. "I thank you all! God be praised!" and he rode past that company
"Well, he's really a good fellow, one can serve under him," said
"In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, laughing (the
the soldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers' voices could
be heard on every side.
"And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?"
he noticed everything..."
"And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were
smeared with chalk--as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as
"I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? You
were near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau."
"Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't
know! The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are
putting them down. When they've been put down, the war with Buonaparte
"What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is
turning into the village already... they will have their buckwheat
cooked before we reach our quarters."
Ah, well, never mind, here you are."
"They might call a halt here or we'll have to do another four
"Wasn't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still
"And here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. There they all
seemed to be Poles--all under the Russian crown--but here they're
all regular Germans."
"Singers to the front " came the captain's order.
drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and
flourishing his arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers' song, commencing
with the words: "Morning dawned, the sun was rising," and
concluding: "On then, brothers, on to glory, led by Father
being sung in Austria, the only change being that the words "Father
as if flinging something to the ground, the drummer--a lean,
handsome soldier of forty--looked sternly at the singers and screwed
up his eyes. Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on
him, he raised both arms as if carefully lifting some invisible but
suddenly flung it down and began:
"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!"
"Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet
player, in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the
shoulders and flourished his castanets as if threatening someone.
The soldiers, swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously,
creaking of springs, and the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard.
chief made a sign that the men should continue to march at ease, and
he and all his suite showed pleasure at the sound of the singing and
the sight of the dancing soldier and the gay and smartly marching men.
In the second file from the right flank, beside which the carriage
notice. It was Dolokhov marching with particular grace and boldness in
time to the song and looking at those driving past as if he pitied all
fell back from the carriage and rode up to Dolokhov.
Hussar cornet Zherkov had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged to
the wild set led by Dolokhov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as a
private and had not seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutuzov
had spoken to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the
cordiality of an old friend.
"My dear fellow, how are you?" said he through the singing, making
his horse keep pace with the company.
"How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly. "I am as you see."
The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy
gaiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness of
Dolokhov's reply.
"And how do you get on with the officers?" inquired Zherkov.
"I was attached; I'm on duty."
Their conversation would probably have been different but for the
effect of that song.
"Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov.
"The devil only knows! They say so."
"I'm glad," answered Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the song
"I say, come round some evening and we'll have a game of faro!" said
Zherkov.
"Why, have you too much money?"
"Do come."
"I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till I get
They were again silent.
"Come if you need anything. One can at least be of use on the
staff..."
Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anything, I won't beg-
I'll take it!"
"Well, never mind; I only..."
"Good health..."
        "It's a long, long way.
Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly
from foot to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down,
galloped past the company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping
time to the song.
relating to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the
command of the advanced army. Prince Andrew Bolkonski came into the
room with the required papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of
the Hofkriegsrath were sitting at the table on which a plan was spread
"Ah!..." said Kutuzov glancing at Bolkonski as if by this
the conversation in French.
"All I can say, General," said he with a pleasant elegance of
with pleasure to his own voice. "All I can say, General, is that if
the matter depended on my personal wishes, the will of His Majesty the
ago have joined the archduke. And believe me on my honour that to me
of the army into the hands of a better informed and more skillful
General."
liberty not to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not,
The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to
excellency's participation in the common action is highly valued by
His Majesty; but we think the present delay is depriving the
been accustomed to win in their battles," he concluded his evidently
prearranged sentence.
Kutuzov bowed with the same smile.
"But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with
which His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine
that the Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a
leader as General Mack, have by now already gained a decisive
victory and no longer need our aid," said Kutuzov.
The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of an
unfavorable rumors that were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suggestion of an
Austrian victory sounded much like irony. But Kutuzov went on
received from Mack's army informed him of a victory and stated
strategically the position of the army was very favorable.
"Give me that letter," said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andrew.
"Please have a look at it"--and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about
passage, in German, from the Archduke Ferdinand's letter:
Also, as we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage
of commanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not
of communications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate his
intention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithful
ally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the
Imperial Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in
conjunction with it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the
Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at
the member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
"But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect
the worst," said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have
done with jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round
Andrew. "Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reports
from our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is
said, handing him several papers, "make a neat memorandum in French
out of all this, showing all the news we have had of the movements
liked to tell him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both,
stepped softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room.
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia,
he had changed greatly during that period. In the expression of his
face, in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of
his former affected languor and indolence. He now looked like a man
occupied with agreeable and interesting work. His face expressed
more satisfaction with himself and those around him, his smile and
other adjutants, and had taken him to Vienna and given him the more
Prince Andrew's father.
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his
industry, firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to
On Kutuzov's staff, among his fellow officers and in the army
generally, Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two
things of him, listened to him, admired, and imitated him, and with
disliked him and considered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable. But
among these people Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that
they respected and even feared him.
Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the waiting room with the papers
on duty, Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book.
"Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski.
"And why is it?"
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.
"No."
"If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come."
"Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.
But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the
who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.
Prince Andrew stopped short.
"Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived general
speaking quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and
advancing straight toward the inner door.
"The commander in chief is engaged," said Kozlovski, going hurriedly
up to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door. "Whom
shall I announce?"
The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who was
rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
threw himself into a chair, gazing at those in the room as if
asking, "Why do they look at me?" Then he lifted his head, stretched
his neck as if he intended to say something, but immediately, with
and Kutuzov appeared in the doorway. The general with the bandaged
long, quick strides with his thin legs, went up to Kutuzov.
Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly
immobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a
wave and his forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head
respectfully, closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been
interest lay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack
and heard the details of his disaster he understood that half the
campaign was lost, understood all the difficulties of the Russian
army's position, and vividly imagined what awaited it and the part
he would have to play. Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the
thought of the humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week's
time he might, perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian
troops, and at the same time could not admit the idea of his hero
being disgraced.
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward
his room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the
corridor he met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag
Zherkov; they were as usual laughing.
"Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew's pale
face and glittering eyes.
"There's nothing to be gay about," answered Bolkonski.
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward
them from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian
general who on Kutuzov's staff in charge of the provisioning of the
Russian army, and the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived
the previous evening. There was room enough in the wide corridor for
the generals to pass the three officers quite easily, but Zherkov,
pushing Nesvitski aside with his arm, said in a breathless voice,
embarrassing attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenly
appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.
"Your excellency," said he in German, stepping forward and
addressing the Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate
you."
"I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived,
quite well, only a little bruised just here," he added, pointing
The general frowned, turned away, and went on.
"Gott, wie naiv!"* said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.
*"Good God, what simplicity!"
Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but
Bolkonski, turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look and
Mack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what lay before the
Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkov's untimely jest.
sharply, with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent
my presence, I will teach you to behave yourself."
gazed at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes.
and taking Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what to
"Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski trying to
"What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his
grieving at the misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely
hommes massacres et l'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez la
le mot pour rire,"* he said, as if strengthening his views by this
individu dont vous avez fait un ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour
vous.*[2] Only a hobbledehoy could amuse himself in this way," he
added in Russian--but pronouncing the word with a French accent-
having noticed that Zherkov could still hear him.
*"Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies destroyed,
and you find that a cause for jesting!"
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he
turned and went out of the corridor.
CHAPTER IV
the German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were
assigned to cavalry-captain Denisov, the squadron commander, known
throughout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov. Cadet
Rostov, ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland, had
lived with the squadron commander.
On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the
news of Mack's defeat, the camp life of the officers of this
cards all night, had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early
in the morning from a foraging expedition. Rostov in his cadet
uniform, with a jerk to his horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg
over the saddle with a supple youthful movement, stood for a moment in
the stirrup as if loathe to part from his horse, and at last sprang
down and called to his orderly.
"Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed up
headlong to the horse. "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," he
young people show to everyone when they are happy.
"Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his
head.
"Mind, walk him up and down well!"
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko had
head. It was evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that
porch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork
gut Morgen!"* he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased to
*"A very good morning! A very good morning!"
"Schon fleissig?"* said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smile
Kaiser Alexander hoch!"*[2] said he, quoting words often repeated by
the German landlord.
*"Busy already?"
The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and
waving it above his head cried:
"Und die ganze Welt hoch!"*
Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried
laughing, "Und vivat die ganze Welt!" Though neither the German
for hay had any reason for rejoicing, they looked at each other with
joyful delight and brotherly love, wagged their heads in token of
their mutual affection, and parted smiling, the German returning to
his cowshed and Rostov going to the cottage he occupied with Denisov.
"Hasn't been in since the evening. Must have been losing,"
answered Lavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back early
to brag about it, but if he stays out till morning it means he's
lost and will come back in a rage. Will you have coffee?"
"Yes, bring some."
Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee. "He's coming!"
said he. "Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and saw
Denisov coming home. Denisov was a small man with a red face,
sparkling black eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore
an unfastened cloak, wide breeches hanging down in creases, and a
crumpled shako on the back of his head. He came up to the porch
gloomily, hanging his head.
"Lavwuska!" he shouted loudly and angrily, "take it off, blockhead!"
"Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and
have seen Fraulein Mathilde."
"Weally! And I've been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like a
luck! Such ill luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on.
teeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his
thick tangled black hair.
"the rat") he said, rubbing his forehead and whole face with both
hands. "Just fancy, he didn't let me win a single cahd, not one cahd."
"He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles
it; gives the singles and snatches the doubles!"
away. Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked
cheerfully with his glittering, black eyes at Rostov.
boots and the clinking of spurs that came to a stop, and a
"The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.
Denisov's face puckered still more.
it. "Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shove
the purse undah the pillow," he said, and went out to the
quartermaster.
Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new
coins in separate piles, began counting them.
"Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me last night," came
"Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's... I knew it," replied a piping
squadron, entered the room.
well in the regiment but was not liked; Rostov especially detested him
"Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?" he asked. (Rook
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in
the face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.
"Oh, he's all right, a good horse," answered Rostov, though the
added.
show you what kind of rivet to use."
"Yes, please do," said Rostov.
"I'll show you, I'll show you! It's not a secret. And it's a horse
In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on the
threshold facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing
Rostov, Denisov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder
and gave a shudder of disgust.
quartermaster's presence.
Rostov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, but
what's one to do?" and, having given his order, he returned to
Telyanin.
Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had
left him, rubbing his small white hands.
up and looking carelessly about him.
"Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov about
yesterday's order. Have you got it, Denisov?"
"Not yet. But where are you off to?"
"I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.
explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
the table. Denisov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a
sheet of paper. He looked gloomily in Rostov's face and said: "I am
"You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep when we don't love. We
are childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God,
one is pua' as on the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Send
him to the devil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to
him not in the least abashed.
quartermaster for the money."
Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.
"Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in the
"Seven new and three old imperials."
"Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you
sca'cwow? Call the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.
Rostov, blushing.
Denisov.
"But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you will
offend me. Really I have some," Rostov repeated.
"No, I tell you."
And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.
"Under the lower pillow."
"It's not there."
"Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up the
He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.
"Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you
kept it under your head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put it
just here. Where is it?" he asked, turning to Lavrushka.
"I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it."
"You're always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget
it. Feel in your pockets."
"No, if I hadn't thought of it being a treasure," said Rostov,
"but I remember putting it there."
Lavrushka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed and
the room. Denisov silently watched Lavrushka's movements, and when the
Denisov glanced at Rostov.
"Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy twicks..."
instantly dropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congested
somewhere below his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not
draw breath.
"And there hasn't been anyone in the room except the lieutenant
and yourselves. It must be here somewhere," said Lavrushka.
"Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!"
shouted Denisov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man
with a threatening gesture. "If the purse isn't found I'll flog you,
I'll flog you all."
on his saber, and put on his cap.
thought a moment, and, evidently understanding what Rostov hinted
at, seized his arm.
purse is here! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found."
"I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, and
"And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov,
rushing at the cadet to restrain him.
But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though
face.
voice. "There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it
He could not finish, and ran out of the room.
orderly. "Has something happened?" he added, surprised at the
"No, nothing."
"You've only just missed him," said the orderly.
The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, and
Rostov, without returning home, took a horse and rode there. There was
an inn in the village which the officers frequented. Rostov rode up to
it and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.
of sausages and a bottle of wine.
"Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word;
Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer in
the room. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of
knives and the munching of the lieutenant.
eyebrows gave it to the waiter.
"Please be quick," he said.
The coin was a new one. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.
"Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, growing suddenly
it, and looked at Telyanin. The lieutenant was looking about in his
usual way and suddenly seemed to grow very merry.
"If we get to Vienna I'll get rid of it there but in these
let me have it, young man, I'm going."
Rostov did not speak.
"And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quite
decently here," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."
of it. Telyanin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into
the pocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his
mouth slightly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I am putting my purse in
my pocket and that's quite simple and is no else's business."
"Well, young man?" he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted
brows he glanced into Rostov's eyes.
Rostov's and back, and back again and again in an instant.
it..." he whispered just above Telyanin's ear.
doubt fell from him. He was glad, and at the same instant began to
pity the miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun
had to be completed.
"Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine," muttered
Telyanin, taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room.
"We must have an explanation..."
"I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov.
Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face began to quiver, his
"Count!... Don't ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money,
Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's eyes, and went out of the
"Count..." said Telyanin drawing nearer to him.
"Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back. "If you need it, take
CHAPTER V
That same evening there was an animated discussion among the
said a tall, grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and
many wrinkles on his large features, to Rostov who was crimson with
excitement.
The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks
lied, and I told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me on
duty every day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make me
"You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted
the staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache.
"You tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an
officer has stolen..."
"I'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of
I am not a diplomatist. That's why I joined the hussars, thinking that
"That's all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that's not the
point. Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet
to demand satisfaction of his regimental commander?"
the staff captain's question by a disapproving shake of his head.
"You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other
officers," continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" (the colonel
"Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and
"I did not expect this of you," said the staff captain seriously and
severely. "You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's not only to him
but to the whole regiment--all of us--you're to blame all round. The
case is this: you ought to have thought the matter over and taken
advice; but no, you go and blurt it all straight out before the
officers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried and
that. And Bogdanich was a brick: he told you you were saying what
was not true. It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dear
the thing over, some conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish
a bit, but why not apologize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever
Bogdanich may be, anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel!
whole regiment!" The staff captain's voice began to tremble. "You have
tomorrow you'll be appointed adjutant somewhere and can snap your
fingers when it is said 'There are thieves among the Pavlograd
officers!' But it's not all the same to us! Am I not right, Denisov?
Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked
with his glittering black eyes at Rostov.
God willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of
the regiment, and Bogdanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old
offense or not but I always stick to mother truth. It's not right!"
And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostov.
officer and then at the other.
"No, gentlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite understand.
You're wrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of
the regiment I'd... Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for me
to blame all round. Well, what else do you want?..."
"Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, turning
round and clapping Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand.
"That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beginning to address
"Gentlemen, I'll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me,"
can't, do what you will! How can I go and apologize like a little
Denisov began to laugh.
for your obstinacy," said Kirsten.
I can't..."
"Well, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what has
become of that scoundrel?" he asked Denisov.
"He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off the list
tomowwow," muttered Denisov.
the staff captain.
"Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss my path. I'd kill him!"
shouted Denisov in a bloodthirsty tone.
"What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the newcomer.
"We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his
whole army."
"I've seen him myself!"
"What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?"
"Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how
did you come here?"
Mack. An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on
"Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two days."
Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges
over the rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October
23 the Russian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday the
defiling through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.
It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out
bridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain,
and then, suddenly spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objects
below, the little town could be seen with its white, red-roofed
houses, its cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamed
jostling masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels,
left bank of the Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic
background of green treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a
convent stood out beyond a wild virgin pine forest, and far away on
command of the rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning the
country through his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvitski, who
had been sent to the rearguard by the commander in chief, was
sitting on the trail of a gun carriage. A Cossack who accompanied
treating some officers to pies and real doppelkummel. The officers
was saying.
"Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers, pleased
place! We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a
splendid house!"
another pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining
approval.
"So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like,"
added he, munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would be
to slip in over there."
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed
"That would be fine, gentlemen!"
The officers laughed.
"Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls
among them. On my word I'd give five years of my life for it!"
"They must be feeling dull, too," said one of the bolder officers,
laughing.
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out
"Yes, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering the
on at the crossing. And why are they dawdling there?"
report of a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the
Nesvitski rose, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling.
"It's a bad business," said the general without answering him,
"our men have been wasting time."
"Yes, please do," answered the general, and he repeated the order
they are to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered; and the
inflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected."
"Very good," answered Nesvitski.
knapsack and flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
watched him smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the
hill.
"Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!" said
the general, turning to an artillery officer. "Have a little fun to
"Crew, to your guns!" commanded the officer.
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and
"One!" came the command.
smoke showing the spot where it burst.
plainly visible as if but a stone's throw away, and the movements of
the approaching enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun came
fully out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the
Two of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bridge,
where there was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, who
had alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed
a few steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each
could do was to smile.
"What a fine fellow you are, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoy
soldier with a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were
crowded together close to his wheels and his horses. "What a fellow!
But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shouted
at the soldiers who were blocking his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep to
to shoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in a
dense mass. Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw the
rapid, noisy little waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddying
round the piles of the bridge chased each other along. Looking on
straps, covered shakos, knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and,
under the shakos, faces with broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and
listless tired expressions, and feet that moved through the sticky mud
monotonous waves of men, like a fleck of white foam on the waves of
the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with a type of face different
from that of the men, squeezed his way along; sometimes like a chip of
wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot, an orderly, or a
townsman was carried through the waves of infantry; and sometimes like
a log floating down the river, an officers' or company's baggage
wagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides,
moved across the bridge.
"It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Are
there many more of you to come?"
"A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat,
That soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on a
"Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?" said an
And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry
soldiers who had evidently been drinking.
end of his gun..." a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up said
"Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered another with a loud
laugh. And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not learn who
"Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'll
soldier with an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, "I
frightened!" said he, as if bragging of having been frightened.
German, and seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A fine
brindled cow with a large udder was attached to the cart behind. A
with bright red cheeks were sitting on some feather beds. Evidently
these fugitives were allowed to pass by special permission. The eyes
of all the soldiers turned toward the women, and while the vehicle was
passing at foot pace all the soldiers' remarks related to the two
young ones. Every face bore almost the same smile, expressing unseemly
"Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!"
who, angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast
"See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!"
"Where are you going?" asked an infantry officer who was eating an
apple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.
"Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.
The girl smiled and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men on
the bridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed.
the same kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens,
bridge, and the whole crowd had to wait.
bridge.
Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvitski
suddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching...
something big, that splashed into the water.
"Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly,
"Encouraging us to get along quicker," said another uneasily.
The crowd moved on again. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon
ball.
"Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said. "Now, then, you there! get out of
continually he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to make
way for him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and
"Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice from
separated by the living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, red
hanging jauntily over his shoulder.
"Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisov
evidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot
whites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a
"Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?"
"The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing his
white teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which
twitched its ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurting
hoofs, and apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider
let him. "What is this? They're like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of
from its scabbard and flourishing it.
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and
Denisov joined Nesvitski.
ridden up to him.
"They don't even give one time to dwink!" answered Vaska Denisov.
"What a dandy you are today!" said Nesvitski, looking at Denisov's
diffused a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.
"Of course. I'm going into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth,
The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and the
determination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shouted
frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through
order, and having done this he rode back.
Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the
ground, eager to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw
resounded on the planks of the bridge, and the squadron, officers in
emerge on his side of it.
trampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will,
estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past
"Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.
"Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whose
mud off his face with his sleeve. "Perched up there, you're more
under the weight of his knapsack.
"Take a stick between your legs, that'll suit you for a horse!"
the hussar shouted back.
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezing
together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At last
battalion came onto the bridge. Only Denisov's squadron of hussars
remained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy, who could
be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible
from the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley through which
our Cossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the
were the French. A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at
tried to talk of other things and to look in other directions, thought
at the patches appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the
enemy's troops. The weather had cleared again since noon and the sun
it. It was calm, and at intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of
the enemy could be heard from the hill. There was no one now between
more clearly felt.
"One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line
dividing the living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and
know. You fear and yet long to cross that line, and know that sooner
side of death. But you are strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and
are surrounded by other such excitedly animated and healthy men." So
thinks, or at any rate feels, anyone who comes in sight of the
enemy, and that feeling gives a particular glamour and glad keenness
of impression to everything that takes place at such moments.
On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon
places. The hussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silence
fell on the whole squadron. All were looking at the enemy in front and
at the squadron commander, awaiting the word of command. A second
hussars, but the balls with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads
command, the whole squadron with its rows of faces so alike yet so
stirrups and sank back again. The soldiers without turning their heads
glanced at one another, curious to see their comrades' impression.
mouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking at the soldiers as if
horse despite its game leg--had the happy air of a schoolboy called up
will distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone with a clear,
something new and stern showed round the mouth.
"Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight!
Look at me," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept
turning his horse in front of the squadron.
The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole
short sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in
bottle; he was only redder than usual. With his shaggy head thrown
back like birds when they drink, pressing his spurs mercilessly into
the sides of his good horse, Bedouin, and sitting as though falling
backwards in the saddle, he galloped to the other flank of the
squadron and shouted in a hoarse voice to the men to look to their
mustache was serious as always, only his eyes were brighter than
usual.
fight. You'll see--we shall retire."
"The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov. "Ah,
at last."
And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet.
bridge. Denisov galloped up to him.
"Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off."
"Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his
squadron back."
The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire
the front line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted
the farther side of the river.
The two Pavlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired up
the hill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdanich
Schubert, came up to Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not far
Telyanin. Rostov, feeling that he was at the front and in the power of
lift his eyes from the colonel's athletic back, his nape covered
with light hair, and his red neck. It seemed to Rostov that
looked around him merrily; then it seemed to him that Bogdanich rode
him--Rostov. Then he imagined how, after the attack, Bogdanich would
come up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously extend the
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds as
he had but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel. After
when he could get more rewards by doing nothing on the staff, and
had succeeded in attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince
Bagration. He now came to his former chief with an order from the
order to stop and fire the bridge."
"An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely.
"I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious
hussars must return quickly and fire the bridge.'"
colonel of hussars with the same order. After him the stout
Nesvitski came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely
"How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached. "I told you to
fire the bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are
and smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand,
"wasn't I telling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material
had been put in position?"
me to burn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders
"How did you get here?" said he, turning to Zherkov.
"On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wring you out!"
"You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer..." continued the colonel in
an offended tone.
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the
stout staff officer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned.
that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would
still do the right thing.
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to
blame for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second
squadron, that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return to
"There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself. "He
wishes to test me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his
face. "Let him see whether I am a coward!" he thought.
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression
conjecture, but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov, and
looked as he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the
hussars hastily dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. The
men were crossing themselves. Rostov no longer looked at the
colonel, he had no time. He was afraid of falling behind the
trembled as he gave his horse into an orderly's charge, and he felt
the blood rush to his heart with a thud. Denisov rode past him,
leaning back and shouting something. Rostov saw nothing but the
hussars running all around him, their spurs catching and their
sabers clattering.
"Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.
looking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud,
stumbled, and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.
triumphant, cheerful face.
Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy
and was about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to the
front the better. But Bogdanich, without looking at or recognizing
"Who's that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right!
Come back, Cadet!" he cried angrily; and turning to Denisov, who,
"Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said.
"Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turning
group of men with yellow shakos, dark-green jackets braided with cord,
and blue riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and
the blue uniforms and groups with horses, easily recognizable as
"Will they burn the bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will they
get there and fire the bridge or will the French get within
grapeshot range and wipe them out?" These were the questions each
asked himself with a sinking heart--watching the bridge and the
hussars in the bright evening light and the blue tunics advancing from
the other side with their bayonets and guns.
"Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are within
suite.
"True enough," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could have
hussars, but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know
Vladimir medal and ribbon? But now, even if they do get peppered,
the squadron may be recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon.
He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were being
detached and hurriedly removed.
On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke
officer of the suite by the arm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen,
fallen!"
"Two, I think."
"If I were Tsar I would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turning
away.
at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
bridge. But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happening
firing at them, no longer to hinder them but because the guns were
trained and there was someone to fire at.
hussars got back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot
the bridge not knowing what to do. There was no one to hew down (as he
bridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like
the other soldiers. He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard
a rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar
nearest to him fell against the rails with a groan. Rostov ran up to
"Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but
still he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
Nicholas Rostov turned away and, as if searching for something,
gazed into the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky,
and how deep! How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what
soft glitter the waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer
still were the faraway blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery,
their summits... There was peace and happiness... "I should wishing
but here... groans, suffering, fear, and this uncertainty and hurry...
somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death, is here above
stretchers came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death and
one feeling of sickening agitation.
"O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protect
me!" Rostov whispered.
sight.
"Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just
above his ear.
"It's all over; but I am a coward--yes, a coward!" thought Rostov,
foot, from the orderly and began to mount.
"Was that grapeshot?" he asked Denisov.
dogs! But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them shooting
at you like a target."
composed of the colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer from
"Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thought Rostov. And this
was true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation
"Here's something for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if I
don't get promoted to a sublieutenancy."
"Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!" said the colonel
triumphantly and gaily.
"And if he asks about the losses?"
wounded, and one knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happy
distinctness.
command of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to
it, losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of
supplies, and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything
that had been foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men
only as far as necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its
heavy equipment. There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and
Melk; but despite the courage and endurance--acknowledged even by
the enemy--with which the Russians fought, the only consequence of
these actions was a yet more rapid retreat. Austrian troops that had
escaped capture at Ulm and had joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated
from the Russian army, and Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and
exhausted forces. The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought
of. Instead of an offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared
Kutuzov when he was in Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the
sole and almost unattainable aim remaining for him was to effect a
junction with the forces that were advancing from Russia, without
On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to the
left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time with
taken: banners, cannon, and two enemy generals. For the first time,
fight had not only held the field but had repulsed the French.
Though the troops were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of
their number in killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number
of sick and wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube
with a letter in which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the
converted into military hospitals could no longer accommodate all
the sick and wounded, yet the stand made at Krems and the victory over
Mortier raised the spirits of the army considerably. Throughout the
whole army and at headquarters most joyful though erroneous rumors
were rife of the imaginary approach of columns from Russia, of some
victory gained by the Austrians, and of the retreat of the
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the
Despite his apparently delicate build Prince Andrew could endure
physical fatigue far better than many very muscular men, and on the
night of the battle, having arrived at Krems excited but not weary,
with a special dispatch to Brunn. To be so sent meant not only a
reward but an important step toward promotion.
The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow
impressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself
send-off given him by the commander in chief and his fellow
long-desired happiness. As soon as he closed his eyes his ears
seemed filled with the rattle of the wheels and the sensation of
away and that he himself was killed, but he quickly roused himself
with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that this was not so
battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... The dark starry night
was followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow was thawing in the
sunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sides of the road
were forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.
The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the
being jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (he
at the envoy hurrying past them.
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what
action they had been wounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube,"
answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the
"Get well soon, lads!" he continued, turning to the soldiers.
conversation.
"Good news!... Go on!" he shouted to the driver, and they galloped
on.
paved streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings,
the lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all
that atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so
attractive to a soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and
sleepless night, Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt
even more vigorous and alert than he had done the day before. Only his
extraordinary clearness and rapidity. He again vividly recalled the
details of the battle, no longer dim, but definite and in the
concise form in which he imagined himself stating them to
the Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined the casual questions that
might be put to him and the answers he would give. He expected to be
however, an official came running out to meet him, and learning that
he was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
the Minister of War."
The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait,
attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.
one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind
instantly suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to
despise the adjutant and the minister. "Away from the smell of powder,
they probably think it easy to gain victories!" he thought. His eyes
narrowed disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with
peculiarly deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightened
minutes taking no notice of his arrival. A wax candle stood at each
side of the minister's bent bald head with its gray temples. He went
on reading to the end, without raising his eyes at the opening of
the door and the sound of footsteps.
papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov's army
interested the Minister of War less than any of the other matters he
was concerned with, or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger
that impression. "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me,"
arranged them evenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectual
and distinctive head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the
firm, intelligent expression on his face changed in a way evidently
news? There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was high
time!"
He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it
with a mournful expression.
"Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!" he exclaimed in German. "What a
calamity! What a calamity!"
Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and
not captured." Again he pondered. "I am very glad you have brought
good news, though Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for the
victory. His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I
thank you! You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the
see you," he added, bowing his head.
indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant.
The whole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed; the battle
CHAPTER X
Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintance
"Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor,"
said Bilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "Franz, put the
prince's things in my bedroom," said he to the servant who was
ushering Bolkonski in. "So you're a messenger of victory, eh?
Splendid! And I am sitting here ill, as you see."
After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat's
settled down comfortably beside the fire.
After his journey and the campaign during which he had been deprived
of all the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life,
Prince Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxurious
in Russian (for they were speaking French) at least with a Russian who
would, he supposed, share the general Russian antipathy to the
Petersburg, but had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in
Vienna with Kutuzov. Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave
greater extent Bilibin gave promise of rising in his diplomatic
career. He still a young man but no longer a young diplomat, as he had
entered the service at the age of sixteen, had been in Paris and
Copenhagen, and now held a rather important post in Vienna. Both the
writing table. He worked well whatever the import of his work. It
was not the question "What for?" but the question "How?" that
were valued not only for what he wrote, but also for his skill in
dealing and conversing with those in the highest spheres.
Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be
made elegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to
say something striking and took part in a conversation only when
that was possible. His conversation was always sprinkled with
portable form as if intentionally, so that insignificant society
people might carry them from drawing room to drawing room. And, in
fact, Bilibin's witticisms were hawked about in the Viennese drawing
after a Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the
principal play of expression on his face. Now his forehead would
would descend and deep wrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small,
deep-set eyes always twinkled and looked out straight.
Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentioning himself,
described the engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.
Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.
"Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from a
votre victoire n'est pas des plus victorieuses."*
He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only those
Mortier and his one division, and even then Mortier slips through your
fingers! Where's the victory?"
"But seriously," said Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say without
boasting that it was a little better than at Ulm..."
"Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?"
"Because not everything happens as one expects or with the
smoothness of a parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get at
the afternoon."
"And why didn't you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to have
methods that he had better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Prince
still why didn't you capture him? So don't be surprised if not only
the Minister of War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor and
King Francis is not much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poor
forehead.
confess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties
here beyond my feeble intelligence, but I can't make it out. Mack
loses a whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl
give no signs of life and make blunder after blunder. Kutuzov alone at
last gains a real victory, destroying the spell of the invincibility
the details."
for Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but
what do we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories?
Bring us nice news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one
archduke's as good as another, as you know) and even if it is only
over a fire brigade of Bonaparte's, that will be another story and
purpose to vex us. The Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke
Ferdinand disgraces himself. You abandon Vienna, give up its
defense--as much as to say: 'Heaven is with us, but heaven help you
expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate us on the victory! Admit
that more irritating news than yours could not have been conceived.
you did gain a brilliant victory, if even the Archduke Karl gained a
"What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?"
"Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count,
our dear Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders."
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception,
and especially after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not
showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna was
fully described: Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that
received as a savior."
"Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Prince
Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle before
Krems was really of small importance in view of such events as the
fall of Austria's capital. "How is it Vienna was taken? What of the
bridge and its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heard
reports that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?" he said.
"Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is
have been in the mountains of Bohemia, and you and your army would
"But still this does not mean that the campaign is over," said
"Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but they
daren't say so. It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign,
it won't be your skirmishing at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, that
preliminaries of the new Campo Formio are to be drawn up."
clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, "and what
luck the man has!"
indicate that he was about to say something witty. "Buonaparte?" he
repeated, accentuating the u: "I think, however, now that he lays down
*"We must let him off the u!"
"But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think the
"This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is
Holy Russian army loots terribly--her army is destroyed, her capital
taken, and all this for the beaux yeux* of His Sardinian Majesty.
And therefore--this is between ourselves--I instinctively feel that we
are being deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations with France
Bonaparte's new triumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience
He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of
musketry and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his
ears, and now again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were
descending the hill, the French were firing, and he felt his heart
palpitating as he rode forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily
whistling all around, and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as
he had not done since childhood.
He woke up...
like a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.
Next day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the first
conversation. Having dressed for his attendance at court in full
In the study were four gentlemen of the diplomatic corps. With
Bolkonski was already acquainted. Bilibin introduced him to the
others.
The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin's were young, wealthy, gay
Bilibin, their leader, called les notres.* This set, consisting almost
exclusively of diplomats, evidently had its own interests which had
nothing to do with war or politics but related to high society, to
certain women, and to the official side of the service. These
gentlemen received Prince Andrew as one of themselves, an honor they
did not extend to many. From politeness and to start conversation,
the talk went off into merry jests and gossip.
*Ours.
fellow diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that his
appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.
Can you fancy the figure he cut?..."
"But the worst of it, gentlemen--I am giving Kuragin away to you--is
advantage of it!"
Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over
"Tell me about that!" he said.
"Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices.
"You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew,
Russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing
among the women!"
Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out laughing in Hippolyte's
face, and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom--he had to
admit--he had almost been jealous on his wife's account, was the
"Oh, I must give you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski.
"Kuragin is exquisite when he discusses politics--you should see his
gravity!"
His Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our
alliance...
by the arm, "I believe that intervention will be stronger than
nonintervention. And..." he paused. "Finally one cannot impute the
And he released Bolkonski's arm to indicate that he had now quite
"Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy golden
satisfaction.
Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was
the wild laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features.
"Well now, gentlemen," said Bilibin, "Bolkonski is my guest in
can, with all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna it
Hippolyte, of course the women."
"In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane
interests," said Bilibin.
"I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrew
looking at his watch.
"Where to?"
"To the Emperor."
"When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the
can't," replied Bolkonski, smiling.
"Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for
after it was over, the adjutant he had seen the previous day
him an audience. The Emperor Francis received him standing in the
middle of the room. Before the conversation began Prince Andrew was
struck by the fact that the Emperor seemed confused and blushed as
if not knowing what to say.
"Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hurriedly.
Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:
"Was Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperor
"At what o'clock did the battle begin?" asked the Emperor.
"I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'clock the battle began at
the front, but at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack began after
five in the afternoon," replied Bolkonski growing more animated and
expecting that he would have a chance to give a reliable account,
which he had ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the
Emperor smiled and interrupted him.
"From where to where, Your Majesty?"
"Three and a half miles, Your Majesty."
"The French have abandoned the left bank?"
"According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during
"Forage has not been supplied to the extent..."
"At what o'clock was General Schmidt killed?"
"At seven o'clock, I believe."
"At seven o'clock? It's very sad, very sad!"
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew
withdrew and was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides.
him to see Her Majesty. The archduchess also wished to see him. He did
not know whom to answer, and for a few seconds collected his thoughts.
window, and began to talk to him.
Contrary to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brought was
the whole morning calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries.
father about the battle and his visit to Brunn. At the door he found a
some time in the shop.
"What is it?" he asked.
"Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling the
scoundrel is again at our heels!"
"Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.
excitement.
"There now! Confess that this is delightful," said he. "This
striking a blow!"
Prince Andrew could not understand.
"But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the
"I come from the archduchess'. I heard nothing there."
"I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew
Auersperg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murat
is now rushing along the road to Brunn and will be here in a day or
two."
"What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was
mined?"
"That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why."
"That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French entered
Vienna as I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday,
head and an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up
the bridge and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign
take it!' 'Yes, let's!' say the others. And off they go and take the
bridge, cross it, and now with their whole army are on this side of
the Danube, marching on us, you, and your lines of communication."
*The marshalls.
it out of this position; that here was the Toulon that would lift
him from the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to
fame! Listening to Bilibin he was already imagining how on reaching
the army he would give an opinion at the war council which would be
entrusted with the executing of the plan.
"Stop this jesting," he said
"I am not jesting," Bilibin went on. "Nothing is truer or sadder.
These gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white
marshals, are on their way to negotiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets
meeting with Bonaparte, that they desire to see Prince Auersperg,
and so on. The officer sends for Auersperg; these gentlemen embrace
the officers, crack jokes, sit on the cannon, and meanwhile a French
material into the water, and approaches the tete-de-pont. At length
Mautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of the Austrian army, hero of
the Turkish wars Hostilities are ended, we can shake one another's
hand.... The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience to make Prince
Auersperg's acquaintance.' In a word, those gentlemen, Gascons indeed,
voit que du feu, et oublie celui qu'il devait faire faire sur
l'ennemi!"*[2] In spite of the animation of his speech, Bilibin did
appreciation. "The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes
the guns, and the bridge is taken! But what is best of all," he went
on, his excitement subsiding under the delightful interest of his
own story, "is that the sergeant in charge of the cannon which was
sergeant, seeing that the French troops were running onto the
bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes stayed his hand. The sergeant,
seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is allowed to speak, turns
to Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a true Gascon) and says:
'I don't recognize the world-famous Austrian discipline, if you
allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It was a stroke of
sergeant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair of the
Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor
rascality...."
*[2] That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that he ought
to be firing at the enemy.
"It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the
gray overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of
firing, and the glory that awaited him.
"Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light," replied
Bilibin. "It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just as
at Ulm... it is..."--he seemed to be trying to find the right
expression. "C'est... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes mackes [It is... it
hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with a
slight smile he began to examine his nails.
"Where are you off to?" he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had
"I am going away."
"Where to?"
"But now I am off at once."
"Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin following him, "I have been
thinking about you. Why are you going?"
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
"Not at all," said Prince Andrew.
contrary, is to take care of yourself. Leave it to those who are no
longer fit for anything else.... You have not been ordered to return
and have not been dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and
go with us wherever our ill luck takes us. They say we are going to
Olmutz, and Olmutz is a very decent town. You and I will travel
comfortably in my caleche."
"Do stop joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.
share defeat and disgrace with Kutuzov's whole army."
"I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he
That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War,
Bolkonski set off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would
heavy baggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorf
Prince Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was
moving with great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was
so obstructed with carts that it was impossible to get by in a
carriage. Prince Andrew took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack
commander, and hungry and weary, making his way past the baggage
wagons, rode in search of the commander in chief and of his own
luggage. Very sinister reports of the position of the army reached him
"Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des
Bonaparte's address to his army at the beginning of the campaign,
feeling of wounded pride, and a hope of glory. "And should there be
no worse than others."
earth by English gold, we shall cause to share the same fate--(the
fate of the army at Ulm)."
He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of
detachments, carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and
the creaking of carts and gun carriages, the tramp of horses, the
crack of whips, shouts, the urging of horses, and the swearing of
soldiers, orderlies, and officers. All along the sides of the road
fallen horses were to be seen, some flayed, some not, and
crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or returned from
directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Their
voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their
"Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski,
recalling Bilibin's words.
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was, he rode up
materials and looking like something between a cart, a cabriolet,
shawls sat behind the apron under the leather hood of the vehicle.
Prince Andrew rode up and was just putting his question to a soldier
when his attention was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the
the equipage. The woman screamed piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew
under the woolen shawl, cried:
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven's sake... Protect
"I'll flatten you into a pancake!" shouted the angry officer to
the soldier. "Turn back with your slut!"
Andrew riding up to the officer.
"Let them pass, I tell you!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his
"And who are you?" cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy
rage, "who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander
here, not you! Go back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeated
from behind.
tipsy rage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that his
championship of the doctor's wife in her queer trap might expose him
Prince Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised
The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the
doctor's wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with a
sense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he
galloped on to the village where he was told that the commander in
chief was.
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
sort out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his
mind. "This is a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinking
as he went up to the window of the first house, when a familiar
voice called him by name.
He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the
"Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick..." he
shouted.
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and another adjutant
having something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if he
had any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm.
"Here, in that house," answered the adjutant.
Nesvitski.
"I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I
could do to get here."
we're getting it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down and
have something to eat."
"You won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,
adjutant.
"Where are headquarters?"
"We are to spend the night in Znaim."
"Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses," said
Nesvitski. "They've made up splendid packs for me--fit to cross the
the matter with you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added,
"It's nothing," replied Prince Andrew.
and the convoy officer.
"I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski.
"Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable,
abominable, quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went off
Andrew entered the passage. Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in the
Austrian general who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little
with cuffs turned up, was hastily writing at a tub turned bottom
upwards. Kozlovski's face looked worn--he too had evidently not
him.
"Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictating to
angrily and disrespectfully at Kozlovski.
dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the
sound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him,
the disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the
something important and disastrous was about to happen.
He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions.
"Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.
and Kutuzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the
expression of the commander in chief's one sound eye showed him to
be so preoccupied with thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of
his presence. He looked straight at his adjutant's face without
Bagration, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm,
impassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander in
"I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince Andrew
rather loudly, handing Kutuzov an envelope.
"Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!"
Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration.
"Well, good-by, Prince," said he to Bagration. "My blessing, and may
His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his
left hand he drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on which
gesture evidently habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagration
kissed him on the neck instead.
"Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to
remain with Prince Bagration's detachment."
he added: "I need good officers myself, need them myself!"
They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.
man's penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkonski's
mind. "If a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God,"
he added as if speaking to himself.
and involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar
near his temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the
empty eye socket. "Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those
been saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently
swaying on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince
delicate irony he questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his
interview with the Emperor, about the remarks he had heard at court
concerning the Krems affair, and about some ladies they both knew.
CHAPTER XIV
that the French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing
troops that were arriving from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at
Krems, Napoleon's army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut
him off completely and surround his exhausted army of forty
thousand, and he would find himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If
Kutuzov decided to abandon the road connecting him with the troops
arriving from Russia, he would have to march with no road into unknown
forces of the enemy and abandoning all hope of a junction with
Buxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreat along the road from Krems
to Olmutz, to unite with the troops arriving from Russia, he risked
Vienna bridge, and encumbered by his baggage and transport, having
strong, who would hem him in from two sides.
Kutuzov chose this latter course.
The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, were
advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles
French forestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army
to a disgrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to
for the French from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the
The night he received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard,
without resting, and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and
long as possible. Kutuzov himself with all his transport took the road
to Znaim.
with his hungry, ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men as
stragglers by the way, Bagration came out on the Vienna-Znaim road
march for some days before he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagration
with his four thousand hungry, exhausted men would have to detain
for days the whole enemy army that came upon him at Hollabrunn,
impossible possible. The success of the trick that had placed the
Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without a fight led Murat
to try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way. Meeting Bagration's weak
detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be Kutuzov's whole
negotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that he
therefore offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count
Another emissary rode to the Russian line to announce the peace
negotiations and to offer the Russian army the three days' truce.
refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to Kutuzov to report the offer he
had received.
Bagration's exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport
and heavy convoys (whose movements were concealed from the French)
advance if but one stage nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce gave the
receiving the news he immediately dispatched Adjutant General
Wintzingerode, who was in attendance on him, to the enemy camp.
Wintzingerode was not merely to agree to the truce but also to offer
transport and of the whole army, had to remain stationary in face of
miles from Hollabrunn) received Murat's dispatch with the proposal
at eight o'clock in the morning
I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command
without my order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign.
that the general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so,
If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I
Russian army.... You are in a position to seize its baggage and
nothing when they have no powers; this one had none.... The
Austrians let themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna
bridge, you are letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of
the Emperor.
the Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim
escape, and Bagration's four thousand men merrily lighted campfires,
dried and warmed themselves, cooked their porridge for the first
time for three days, and not one of them knew or imagined what was
in store for him.
CHAPTER XV
Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who
reported himself to Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet
affairs. They talked of peace but did not believe in its
favorite and trusted adjutant, received him with distinction and
an engagement that day or the next, and giving him full liberty to
eye on the order of retreat, "which is also very important."
Bagration as if to reassure Prince Andrew.
"If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a
medal he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he
wishes to stay with me, let him... he'll be of use here if he's a
brave officer," thought Bagration. Prince Andrew, without replying,
asked the prince's permission to ride round the position to see the
dressed man with a diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of
speaking French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince
Andrew.
benches, and fencing from the village.
"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff
sit. This morning I turned them all out and now look, it's full again.
I must go there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won't take a
moment."
said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
and weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more than
once. "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. The
Captain," and he turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer
who without his boots (he had given them to the canteen keeper to
a good example, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will be
sounded and you'll be in a pretty position without your boots!" (The
staff officer smiled.) "Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all of
"The soldiers say it feels easier without boots," said Captain
Tushin smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently
wishing to adopt a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt
"Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer trying to
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer's small figure.
There was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather
soldiers and officers of various regiments, they saw on their left
some entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which
showed up red. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt
sleeves despite the cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host
of white ants; spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown
up from behind the bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer
rode up, looked at the entrenchment, and went on again. Just behind it
they came upon some dozens of soldiers, continually replaced by
and put their horses to a trot to escape from the poisoned
atmosphere of these latrines.
"Voila l'agrement des camps, monsieur le Prince,"* said the staff
officer.
*"This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince."
They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could
already be seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the
"That's our battery," said the staff officer indicating the
"Thank you very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew,
don't trouble yourself further."
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly
and cheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression had
been in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road
seven miles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and
alarm could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French
lines the more confident was the appearance of our troops. The
soldiers in their greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major
and company officers were counting the men, poking the last man in
scattered over the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and
fires sat others, dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg
bands or mending boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and
porridge cookers. In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers
were gazing eagerly at the steaming boiler, waiting till the sample,
crowded round a pock-marked, broad-shouldered sergeant major who,
him. The soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with
licking their lips and wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats.
All their faces were as serene as if all this were happening at home
awaiting peaceful encampment, and not within sight of the enemy before
grenadiers--fine fellows busy with similar peaceful affairs--near
the shelter of the regimental commander, higher than and different
grenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two soldiers held him while
two others were flourishing their switches and striking him
regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally. A stout
major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the screams
"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,
unnatural screams, continued.
"Go on, go on!" said the major.
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his
face stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the
adjutant as he rode by.
front line and that of the enemy were far apart on the right and
left flanks, but in the center where the men with a flag of truce
had passed that morning, the lines were so near together that the
men could see one another's faces and speak to one another. Besides
the soldiers who formed the picket line on either side, there were
many curious onlookers who, jesting and laughing, stared at their
strange foreign enemies.
The soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a
curiosity, no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the
"Look! Look there!" one soldier was saying to another, pointing to a
Russian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer
"Wait a bit and listen. It's fine!" answered Sidorov, who was
considered an adept at French.
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov. Prince
Andrew recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying.
trying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible
to him. "More, please: more! What's he saying?"
the campaign. The Frenchman, confusing the Austrians with the
Russians, was trying to prove that the Russians had surrendered and
Russians had not surrendered but had beaten the French.
"We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive you
off," said Dolokhov.
"We'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov...,"* said Dolokhov.
*"On vous fera danser."
"It's ancient history," said another, guessing that it referred to a
former war. "The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the
others..."
"Bonaparte..." began Dolokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.
And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier's Russian and
Sidorov, you have a try!"
Sidorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabber
meaningless sounds very fast: "Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter,
and good-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the
to be to unload the muskets, muskets, explode the ammunition, and
But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and
entrenchments looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannon
officer had told him the whole field could be seen. Here he
dismounted, and stopped beside the farthest of the four unlimbered
cannon. Before the guns an artillery sentry was pacing up and down; he
stood at attention when the officer arrived, but at a sign resumed his
measured, monotonous pacing. Behind the guns were their limbers and
left, not far from the farthest cannon, was a small, newly constructed
wattle shed from which came the sound of officers' voices in eager
conversation.
the greater part of the enemy's opened out from this battery. Just
facing it, on the crest of the opposite hill, the village of Schon
farthest point the dragoons. In the center, where Tushin's battery
stood and from which Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was the
easiest and most direct descent and ascent to the brook separating
in which smoked the bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood.
The French line was wider than ours, and it was plain that they
could easily outflank us on both sides. Behind our position was a
retire. Prince Andrew took out his notebook and, leaning on the
points, intending to mention them to Bagration. His idea was, first,
to concentrate all the artillery in the center, and secondly, to
withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the dip. Prince Andrew,
being always near the commander in chief, closely following the mass
movements and general orders, and constantly studying historical
important possibilities: "If the enemy attacks the right flank," he
said to himself, "the Kiev grenadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs must
case the dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack. If
they attack our center we, having the center battery on this high
ground, shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreat
to the dip by echelons." So he reasoned.... All the time he had been
but as often happens had not understood a word of what they were
saying. Suddenly, however, he was struck by a voice coming from the
shed, and its tone was so sincere that he could not but listen.
"No, friend," said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew,
a familiar voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know what
Another, a younger voice, interrupted him: "Afraid or not, you can't
"All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a third
manly voice interrupting them both. "Of course you artillery men are
very wise, because you can take everything along with you--vodka and
snacks."
And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,
Whatever we may say about the soul going to the sky... we know there
is no sky but only an atmosphere."
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.
"Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Tushin," it said.
the sutler's hut without his boots." He recognized the agreeable,
philosophizing voice with pleasure.
"Some herb vodka? Certainly!" said Tushin. "But still, to conceive a
He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air;
ball, as if it had not finished saying what was necessary, thudded
mass of earth. The ground seemed to groan at the terrible impact.
And immediately Tushin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth
and his kind, intelligent face rather pale, rushed out of the shed
followed by the owner of the manly voice, a dashing infantry officer
who hurried off to his company, buttoning up his coat as he ran.
CHAPTER XVII
ran rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hitherto
motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was a
battery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Two
mounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were galloping up the hill. A
probably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot had
not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a
galloped back to Grunth to find Prince Bagration. He heard the
guns had begun to reply. From the bottom of the slope, where the
parleys had taken place, came the report of musketry.
letter, and Murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at
Russian wings, hoping before evening and before the arrival of the
rush to his heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"
Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and
drinking vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same
ready, and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that
enjoyable!" was what the face of each soldier and each officer
seemed to say.
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up,
waiting for him to come up; Prince Bagration reined in his horse and
Prince Andrew told him what he had seen.
Bagration's hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
and wished he could tell what, if anything, this man was thinking
impassive face?" Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince
Bagration bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew
told him, and said, "Very good!" in a tone that seemed to imply that
everything that took place and was reported to him was exactly what he
had foreseen. Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride,
direction of Tushin's battery. Prince Andrew followed with the
suite. Behind Prince Bagration rode an officer of the suite, the
officer on duty, riding a fine bobtailed horse, and a civilian--an
accountant who had asked permission to be present at the battle out of
curiosity. The accountant, a stout, full-faced man, looked around
him with a naive smile of satisfaction and presented a strange
appearance among the hussars, Cossacks, and adjutants, in his camlet
coat, as he jolted on his horse with a convoy officer's saddle.
"He wants to see a battle," said Zherkov to Bolkonski, pointing to
cunning smile, as if flattered at being made the subject of
"It is very strange, mon Monsieur Prince," said the staff officer.
By this time they were all approaching Tushin's battery, and a
ball struck the ground in front of them.
"What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naive
"So that's what they hit with?" asked the accountant. "How awful!"
He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finished
suddenly ended with a thud into something soft... f-f-flop! and a
Cossack, riding a little to their right and behind the accountant,
crashed to earth with his horse. Zherkov and the staff officer bent
stopped, facing the Cossack, and examined him with attentive
Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing
say, "Is it worth while noticing trifles?" He reined in his horse with
the case of a skillful rider and, slightly bending over, disengaged
his saber which had caught in his cloak. It was an old-fashioned saber
reached the battery at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined
"Whose company?" asked Prince Bagration of an artilleryman
He asked, "Whose company?" but he really meant, "Are you
frightened here?" and the artilleryman understood him.
"Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the red-haired,
freckled gunner in a merry voice, standing to attention.
"Yes, yes," muttered Bagration as if considering something, and he
his suite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they
could see the gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quickly
back to its former position. A huge, broad-shouldered gunner, Number
One, holding a mop, his legs far apart, sprang to the wheel; while
Number Two with a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon's
the tail of the gun carriage, moved forward and, not noticing the
"Lift it two lines more and it will be just right," cried he in a
feeble voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill suited to
his weak figure. "Number Two!" he squeaked. "Fire, Medvedev!"
incendiary balls at the village of Schon Grabern visible just
opposite, in front of which large masses of French were advancing.
fire to the village. "Very good!" said Bagration in reply to the
officer's report, and began deliberately to examine the whole
our right. Below the height on which the Kiev regiment was
stationed, in the hollow where the rivulet flowed, the soul-stirring
rolling and crackling of musketry was heard, and much farther to the
Bagration a French column that was outflanking us. To the left the
horizon bounded by the adjacent wood. Prince Bagration ordered two
battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the right flank.
The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that if
these battalions went away, the guns would remain without support.
Prince Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked
at him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer's
remark was just and that really no answer could be made to it. But
of the French were coming down upon them and that his regiment was
later with the news that the commander of the dragoons had already
retreated beyond the dip in the ground, as a heavy fire had been
opened on him and he was losing men uselessly, and so had hastened
to throw some sharpshooters into the wood.
As he was leaving the battery, firing was heard on the left also,
and as it was too far to the left flank for him to have time to go
there himself, Prince Bagration sent Zherkov to tell the general in
command (the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutuzov at
Andrew listened attentively to Bagration's colloquies with the
commanding officers and the orders he gave them and, to his
Bagration tried to make it appear that everything done by necessity,
by accident, or by the will of subordinate commanders was done, if not
by his direct command, at least in accord with his intentions.
tact Bagration showed, his presence was very valuable. Officers who
officers greeted him gaily, grew more cheerful in his presence, and
were evidently anxious to display their courage before him.
CHAPTER XVIII
Prince Bagration, having reached the highest point of our right
they got to the hollow the less they could see but the more they
felt the nearness of the actual battlefield. They began to meet
hit him in the throat or mouth. Another was walking sturdily by
himself but without his musket, groaning aloud and swinging his arm
greatcoat as from a bottle. He had that moment been wounded and his
ascending the hill breathing heavily, and despite the general's
rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the smoke, and an
retreating soldiers, ordering them back. Bagration rode up to the
the sound of voices and the shouts of command. The whole air reeked
with smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with
firing, though who they were firing at could not be seen for the smoke
whistling of bullets were often heard. "What is this?" thought
attack, for they are not moving; it can't be a square--for they are
The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with a
pleasant smile--his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes,
been attacked by French cavalry and that, though the attack had been
been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what had
occurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know
him, and could not say with certainty whether the attack had been
repulsed or his regiment had been broken up. All he knew was that at
the commencement of the action balls and shells began flying all
shouted "Cavalry!" and our men had begun firing. They were still
firing, not at the cavalry which had disappeared, but at French
infantry who had come into the hollow and were firing at our men.
he had desired and expected. Turning to his adjutant he ordered him to
bring down the two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs whom they had
just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by the changed expression on
Prince Bagration's face at this moment. It expressed the
concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of a man who
dull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation of
eagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything although
The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration, entreating
him to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were.
for support at an officer of the suite who turned away from him.
your hands." He spoke as if those bullets could not kill him, and
not reply; he only gave an order to cease firing and re-form, so as to
the curtain of smoke that had concealed the hollow, driven by a rising
wind, began to move from right to left as if drawn by an invisible
hand, and the hill opposite, with the French moving about on it,
column advancing against them and winding down over the uneven ground.
officers from the men, and see the standard flapping against its
staff.
"They march splendidly," remarked someone in Bagration's suite.
The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. The
clash would take place on this side of it...
The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly
formed up and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the
Before they had reached Bagration, the weighty tread of the mass of
men marching in step could be heard. On their left flank, nearest to
Bagration, marched a company commander, a fine round-faced man, with a
wattle shed. At that moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how
dashing a fellow he would appear as he passed the commander.
his full height without the smallest effort, his ease contrasting with
the heavy tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. He
carried close to his leg a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, and
not like a real weapon) and looked now at the superior officers and
now back at the men without losing step, his whole powerful body
concentrated on passing the commander in the best possible manner, and
feeling that he was doing it well he was happy. "Left... left...
left..." he seemed to repeat to himself at each alternate step; and in
time to this, with stern but varied faces, the wall of soldiers
these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be repeating to himself at each
alternate step, "Left... left... left..." A fat major skirted a
behind, his face showing alarm at his defection, ran at a trot,
panting to catch up with his company. A cannon ball, cleaving the air,
flew over the heads of Bagration and his suite, and fell into the
column to the measure of "Left... left!" "Close up!" came the
company commander's voice in jaunty tones. The soldiers passed in a
semicircle round something where the ball had fallen, and an old
trooper on the flank, a noncommissioned officer who had stopped beside
the dead men, ran to catch up his line and, falling into step with a
"Well done, lads!" said Prince Bagration.
Bagration as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: "We
know that ourselves!" Another, without looking round, as though
The order was given to halt and down knapsacks.
Bagration rode round the ranks that had marched past him and
dismounted. He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over
head of the French column, with its officers leading, appeared from
below the hill.
"Forward, with God!" said Bagration, in a resolute, sonorous
voice, turning for a moment to the front line, and slightly swinging
awkward gait of a cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisible
power was leading him forward, and experienced great happiness.
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside
Bagration, could clearly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets,
difficulty.) Prince Bagration gave no further orders and silently
another rang out from the French, smoke appeared all along their
them the round-faced officer who had marched so gaily and
Bagration looked round and shouted, "Hurrah!"
"Hurrah--ah!--ah!" rang a long-drawn shout from our ranks, and
flank. In the center Tushin's forgotten battery, which had managed
to set fire to the Schon Grabern village, delayed the French
advance. The French were putting out the fire which the wind was
spreading, and thus gave us time to retreat. The retirement of the
hurried and noisy, but the different companies did not get mixed.
But our left--which consisted of the Azov and Podolsk infantry and the
superior French forces under Lannes and was thrown into confusion.
Zherkov, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horse
about and galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagration than his
Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front where
the firing was, he began to look for the general and his staff where
they could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.
of the regiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which
Dolokhov was serving as a private. But the command of the extreme left
flank had been assigned to the commander of the Pavlograd regiment
in which Rostov was serving, and a misunderstanding arose. The two
the action had begun on the right flank and the French were already
advancing, were engaged in discussion with the sole object of
offending one another. But the regiments, both cavalry and infantry,
were by no means ready for the impending action. From privates to
hussars, flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, "so
let him do what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars...
But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon and musketry, mingling
together, thundered on the right and in the center, while the
capotes of Lannes' sharpshooters were already seen crossing the
milldam and forming up within twice the range of a musket shot. The
steps, and having mounted drew himself up very straight and tall and
"Once again, Colonel," said the general, "I can't leave half my
men in the wood. I beg of you, I beg of you," he repeated, "to
occupy the position and prepare for an attack."
"I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!"
suddenly replied the irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry..."
"I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and if
you are not aware of the fact..."
touching his horse and turning purple in the face. "Vill you be so
goot to come to ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot? I don't
pleasure and I won't allow it to be said!"
Taking the colonel's outburst as a challenge to his courage, the
general expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the front
line, as if their differences would be settled there amongst the
bullets. They reached the front, several bullets sped over them, and
they halted in silence. There was nothing fresh to be seen from the
it was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken
detect signs of cowardice in the other. Both passed the examination
successfully. As there was nothing to said, and neither wished to give
occasion for it to be alleged that he had been the first to leave
wood. The French had attacked the men collecting wood in the copse. It
was no longer possible for the hussars to retreat with the infantry.
attack in order to cut away through for themselves.
bridge, there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, and
again that terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear-
them. All were conscious of this unseen line, and the question whether
they would cross it or not, and how they would cross it,
agitated them all.
The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply to
questions put to him by the officers, and, like a man desperately
The command to form up rang out and the sabers whizzed as they were
drawn from their scabbards. Still no one moved. The troops of the left
flank, infantry and hussars alike, felt that the commander did not
himself know what to do, and this irresolution communicated itself
"If only they would be quick!" thought Rostov, feeling that at
fo'ward!"
Before him, on the right, Rostov saw the front lines of his
hussars and still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see
way off.
"Faster!" came the word of command, and Rostov felt Rook's flanks
drooping as he broke into a gallop.
had crossed that line and not only was there nothing terrible, but
will slash at him!" thought Rostov, gripping the hilt of his saber.
"Hur-a-a-a-ah!" came a roar of voices. "Let anyone come my way now,"
over the squadron. Rostov raised his saber, ready to strike, but at
that instant the trooper Nikitenko, who was galloping ahead, shot away
carried forward with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same
spot. From behind him Bondarchuk, an hussar he knew, jolted against
him and looked angrily at him. Bondarchuk's horse swerved and galloped
past.
asked and answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle
of a field. Instead of the moving horses and hussars' backs, he saw
were, and where the French, he did not know. There was no one near.
Having disentangled his leg, he rose. "Where, on which side, was now
the line that had so sharply divided the two armies?" he asked himself
and could not answer. "Can something bad have happened to me?" he
superfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if
it were not his. He examined his hand carefully, vainly trying to find
blood on it. "Ah, here are people coming," he thought joyfully, seeing
some men running toward him. "They will help me!" In front came a
the hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a Russian hussar.
He was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him.
his eyes. "Can they be French?" He looked at the approaching
Frenchmen, and though but a moment before he had been galloping to get
running? Can they be coming at me? And why? To kill me? Me whom
everyone is so fond of?" He remembered his mother's love for him,
and his family's, and his friends', and the enemy's intention to
kill him seemed impossible. "But perhaps they may do it!" For more
than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing the
situation. The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked nose, was
the excited, alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down, holding
his breath, and running so lightly, frightened Rostov. He seized his
pistol and, instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and ran
feeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns
bridge, but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One
single sentiment, that of fear for his young and happy life, possessed
with the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay, now and then
run to a walk and, turning, shouted something loudly to a comrade
"They can't have wanted to kill me." But at the same time, his left
could run no more. The Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostov
closed his eyes and stooped down. One bullet and then another whistled
left hand with his right, and reached the bushes. Behind these were
some Russian sharpshooters.
CHAPTER XX
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the
outskirts of the wood ran out of it, the different companies getting
mixed, and retreated as a disorderly crowd. One soldier, in his
battle, and that word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of
panic.
general realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment,
and the thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years' service
for negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting the
above all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for
around, but fortunately missed him. His one desire was to know what
was happening and at any cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he
had made one, so that he, an exemplary officer of twenty-two years'
Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behind
the copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running and
descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides
soldiers attend to the voice of their commander, or would they,
disregarding him, continue their flight? Despite his desperate
shouts that used to seem so terrible to the soldiers, despite his
self, and the flourishing of his saber, the soldiers all continued
in a panic.
powder smoke and stopped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But at
that moment the French who were attacking, suddenly and without any
apparent reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and
Russian sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It was
Timokhin's company, which alone had maintained its order in the wood
and, having lain in ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French
enemy with such a desperate cry and such mad, drunken determination
that, taken by surprise, the French had thrown down their muskets
and run. Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin, killed a Frenchman at
close quarters and was the first to seize the surrendering French
re-formed, and the French who had nearly cut our left flank in half
were for the moment repulsed. Our reserve units were able to join
up, and the fight was at an end. The regimental commander and Major
commander's stirrup, almost leaning against him. The man was wearing a
bluish coat of broadcloth, he had no knapsack or cap, his head was
bandaged, and over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung.
He had an officer's sword in his hand. The soldier was pale, his
blue eyes looked impudently into the commander's face, and his lips
were smiling. Though the commander was occupied in giving instructions
to Major Ekonomov, he could not help taking notice of the soldier.
"Your excellency, here are two trophies," said Dolokhov, pointing to
stopped the company." Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and
spoke in abrupt sentences. "The whole company can bear witness. I
Ekonomov.
But Dolokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief around
his head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
excellency!"
Tushin's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of
the action did Prince Bagration, still hearing the cannonade in the
the supports attached to Tushin's battery had been moved away in the
firing and was only not captured by the French because the enemy could
not surmise that anyone could have the effrontery to continue firing
from four quite undefended guns. On the contrary, the energetic action
of that battery led the French to suppose that here--in the center-
the main Russian forces were concentrated. Twice they had attempted to
grapeshot from the four isolated guns on the hillock.
Soon after Prince Bagration had left him, Tushin had succeeded in
"Look at them scurrying! It's burning! Just see the smoke! Fine!
Grand! Look at the smoke, the smoke!" exclaimed the artillerymen,
brightening up.
All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in the
columns that had advanced beyond the village went back; but as
guns, one knocking over two horses and another tearing off a
however, not diminished, but only changed character. The horses were
carried away, and the four guns were turned against the ten-gun
guns' crews had been disabled, but the artillerymen were still as
below them, and then they fired grapeshot at them.
Little Tushin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly
ran forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the
Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always
made him jump, Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from
about replacing dead or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones,
the men who, as is always the case, hesitated about lifting the
as is always the case in an artillery company, a head and shoulders
taller and twice as broad as their officer--all looked at their
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and
elated. It seemed to him that it was a very long time ago, almost a
day, since he had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and
that the corner of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar
did everything the best of officers could do in his position, he was
in a state akin to feverish delirium or drunkenness.
of the blood of men and horses, from the little puffs of smoke on
the earth, a man, a gun, a horse), from the sight of all these
things a fantastic world of his own had taken possession of his
were in his fancy not guns but pipes from which occasional puffs
"There... he's puffing again," muttered Tushin to himself, as a
by the wind.
"Now look out for the ball... we'll throw it back."
close by, who heard him muttering.
"Come along, our Matvevna!" he said to himself. "Matvevna"* was
the name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which
was large and of an old pattern. The French swarming round their
Number One of the second gun's crew was "uncle"; Tushin looked at
movement. The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill, now
listened intently to the ebb and flow of these sounds.
*Daughter of Matthew.
"Now then, Matvevna, dear old lady, don't let me down!" he was
called above his head: "Captain Tushin! Captain!"
turned him out of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping
"Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you..."
superior.
"I... don't..." he muttered, holding up two fingers to his cap.
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannon
ball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.
ball stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.
The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the
space where Tushin's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with
a broken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed
horses. Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the
with Tushin, stepping across the bodies and under a terrible fire from
seem not to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two
Prince Andrew rode up to Tushin.
"Well, till we meet again..." he said, holding out his hand to
Tushin.
CHAPTER XXI
The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,
dark and the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous.
The cannonade was dying down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on
the right sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Tushin with his guns,
continually driving round or coming upon wounded men, was out of range
of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the
staff, among them the staff officer and Zherkov, who had been twice
proceed, reprimanding and reproaching him. Tushin gave no orders, and,
without knowing why--rode behind on his artillery nag. Though the
orders were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves
after troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages. The jaunty
infantry officer who just before the battle had rushed out of Tushin's
wattle shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on "Matvevna's"
carriage. At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar cadet, supporting one
God's sake... I can't walk. For God's sake!"
and been refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.
lad," he said, addressing his favorite soldier. "And where is the
wounded officer?"
"Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,
The cadet was Rostov. With one hand he supported the other; he was
"What, are you wounded, my lad?" said Tushin, approaching the gun on
"No, it's a sprain."
"Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?" inquired Tushin.
"It was the officer, your honor, stained it," answered the
apologizing for the state of his gun.
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by
the infantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they
near by on the right, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes of
was met by soldiers who had sheltered in the village houses. They
and the artillerymen, Tushin, and the cadet exchanged silent glances
as they awaited their fate. The firing died down and soldiers, talking
"We've given it 'em hot, mate! They won't make another push now,"
said another.
drink?"
by the humming infantry as by a frame.
flowing always in one direction, humming with whispers and talk and
the sound of hoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans and
sound in the darkness of the night. The gloom that enveloped the
with the darkness of the night. After a while the moving mass became
agitated, someone rode past on a white horse followed by his suite,
halted. All remained where they were in the middle of the muddy road.
having given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a
dressing station or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down by a
himself to the fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering
shook his whole body. Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but
he kept awake by an excruciating pain in his arm, for which
he could find no satisfactory position. He kept closing his eyes and
then again looking at the fire, which seemed to him dazzlingly red,
eyes were fixed with sympathy and commiseration on Rostov, who saw
that Tushin with his whole heart wished to help him but could not.
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry,
who were walking, driving past, and settling down all around. The
sound of voices, the tramping feet, the horses' hoofs moving in mud,
rumble.
before and around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted on
"You don't mind your honor?" he asked Tushin. "I've lost my company,
your honor. I don't know where... such bad luck!"
With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came
up to the bonfire, and addressing Tushin asked him to have the guns
rushed to the campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately,
each trying to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding
shouted hoarsely.
Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg
band, came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water.
Tushin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier
ran up, begging a little fire for the infantry.
"A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you,
fellow countrymen. Thanks for the fire--we'll return it with
Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and
passed by the fire. One of them stumbled.
"He's dead--why carry him?" said another.
And they disappeared into the darkness with with their load.
"Still aching?" Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper.
"Yes."
walked away from the fire.
for him, Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talking with some
bone, and the general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years,
flushed by a glass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with
Prince Andrew, pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glittering
eyes.
shaking his head in perplexity--perhaps because the banner really
to look on at a dinner where there was no place for him. In the next
hut there was a French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our
Bagration was thanking the individual commanders and inquiring into
details of the action and our losses. The general whose regiment had
bayonet charge with two battalions and had broken up the French
troops.
disorganized, I stopped in the road and thought: 'I'll let them come
on and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion'--and
that's what I did."
The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not
managed to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened.
Perhaps it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid
all that confusion what did or did not happen?
remembering Dolokhov's conversation with Kutuzov and his last
interview with the gentleman-ranker--"that Private Dolokhov, who was
reduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my presence
and particularly distinguished himself."
"I saw the Pavlograd hussars attack there, your excellency,"
chimed in Zherkov, looking uneasily around. He had not seen the
hussars all that day, but had heard about them from an infantry
his usual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to the
glory of our arms and of the day's work, they assumed a serious
infantry, cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns were
abandoned in the center?" he inquired, searching with his eyes for
someone. (Prince Bagration did not ask about the guns on the left
flank; he knew that all the guns there had been abandoned at the
very beginning of the action.) "I think I sent you?" he added, turning
"One was damaged," answered the staff officer, "and the other I
can't understand. I was there all the time giving orders and had
modestly.
Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouacking close to the
village and had already been sent for.
Andrew.
officer, with a smile to Bolkonski.
"I had not the pleasure of seeing you," said Prince Andrew, coldly
and abruptly.
All were silent. Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way
timidly from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past
the generals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always
was by the sight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of
so much at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom
guilt and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive
present themselves to Tushin in all their horror. He had been so
Bagration with his lower jaw trembling and was hardly able to
excellency."
"You might have taken some from the covering troops."
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy who
has blundered looks at an examiner.
The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagration, apparently not
wishing to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture
Bolkonski, who spoke with suppressed agitation.
"And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," he
continued, "we owe today's success chiefly to the action of that
and without awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
Prince Bagration looked at Tushin, evidently reluctant to show
distrust in Bolkonski's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to
credit it, bent his head, and told Tushin that he could go. Prince
Andrew went out with him.
hoped.
"Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will
all this end?" thought Rostov, looking at the changing shadows
Irresistible drowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his
eyes, and the impression of those voices and faces and a sense of
wounded and unwounded--it was they who were crushing, weighing down,
and twisting the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm
and shoulder. To rid himself of them he closed his eyes.
For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things
appeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand,
Sonya's thin little shoulders, Natasha's eyes and laughter, Denisov
with the harsh voice, and it was that affair and this soldier that
were so agonizingly, incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and
but they would not for an instant let his shoulder move a hair's
breadth. It would not ache--it would be well--if only they did not
pull it, but it was impossible to get rid of them.
He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hung
less than a yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of falling
doctor had not come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was
pity me. Yet I was once at home, strong, happy, and loved." He
sighed and, doing so, groaned involuntarily.
"Eh, is anything hurting you?" asked the soldier, shaking his
shirt out over the fire, and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt
Rostov did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes
fluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm,
did I come here?" he wondered.
of Bagration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.
Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out his
plans. Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his own
getting on had become a habit. Schemes and devices for which he
interest of his life, were constantly shaping themselves in his
mind, arising from the circumstances and persons he met. Of these
plans he had not merely one or two in his head but dozens, some only
beginning to form themselves, some approaching achievement, and some
"This man now has influence, I must gain his confidence and friendship
and through him obtain a special grant." Nor did he say to himself:
"Pierre is a rich man, I must entice him to marry my daughter and lend
me the forty thousand rubles I need." But when he came across
a man of position his instinct immediately told him that this
man could be useful, and without any premeditation Prince Vasili
appointment as Gentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time
that he was doing the right thing, Prince Vasili did everything to get
beforehand he could not have been so natural and shown such unaffected
most opportune moment for making use of people.
purpose of which was not clear to him, to question his chief
now have been offended and grieved had he chosen not to see them.
alike--were all disposed to treat the young heir in the most
friendly and flattering manner: they were all evidently firmly
heart," "You are yourself so honorable Count," or, "Were he as
clever as you," and so on, till he began sincerely to believe in his
own exceptional kindness and extraordinary intelligence, the more so
as in the depth of his heart it had always seemed to him that he
been spiteful toward him and evidently unfriendly now became gentle
hair plastered down like a doll's, had come into Pierre's room after
the funeral. With drooping eyes and frequent blushes she told him
she was very sorry about their past misunderstandings and did not
now feel she had a right to ask him for anything, except only for
permission, after the blow she had received, to remain for a few weeks
longer in the house she so loved and where she had sacrificed so much.
She could not refrain from weeping at these words. Touched that this
statuesque princess could so change, Pierre took her hand and begged
her forgiveness, without knowing what for. From that day the eldest
scarf for him.
a great deal from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handing
Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to
princess that it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the
affair of the inlaid portfolio. Pierre signed the deed and after
that the princess grew still kinder. The younger sisters also became
affectionate to him, especially the youngest, the pretty one with
confusion when meeting him.
It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and it
would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that he
could not but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides,
he had no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or
not. He was always busy and always felt in a state of mild and
cheerful intoxication. He felt as though he were the center of some
important and general movement; that something was constantly expected
of him, that if he did not do it he would grieve and disappoint many
what was demanded of him, but still that happy result always
remained in the future.
More than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre's
Count Bezukhov he did not let go his hold of the lad. He had the air
of a man oppressed by business, weary and suffering, who yet would
not, for pity's sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, was
call Pierre, or go to him himself, and tell him what ought to be
every time: "You know I am overwhelmed with business and it is
know quite well that what I propose is the only thing possible."
"Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last," said Prince
speaking as if he were saying something which had long since been
agreed upon and could not now be altered. "We start tomorrow and I'm
business here is now settled, and I ought to have been off long ago.
Here is something I have received from the chancellor. I asked him for
Gentleman of the Bedchamber. The diplomatic career now lies open
before you."
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words
were pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his
career, wished to make some suggestion. But Prince Vasili
interrupted him in the special deep cooing tone, precluding the
when special persuasion was needed.
conscience, and there is nothing to thank me for. No one has ever
these terrible recollections." Prince Vasili sighed. "Yes, yes, my
forgetting," he added. "You know, mon cher, your father and I had some
estate and will keep it; you won't require it. We'll go into the
accounts later."
thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which the
prince had retained for himself.
gentleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather
numerous that, even more than in Moscow, he felt a sense of
bewilderment, bustle, and continual expectation of some good, always
in front of him but never attained.
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in
reduced to the ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the
provinces; Prince Andrew was abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunity
mind by intimate talks with a friend older than himself and whom he
respected. His whole time was taken up with dinners and balls and
princess, his wife, and his beautiful daughter Helene.
Like the others, Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of
Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt that
became foolish as soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary
Hippolyte's stupidest remarks came out clever and apt. Now
Pavlovna's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added:
"You will find the beautiful Helene here, whom it is always delightful
to see."
When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that some
Helene, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation
were being imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleased
Emperor Alexander's visit to Potsdam, and of how the two august
friends had pledged themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold
Pavlovna received Pierre with a shade of melancholy, evidently
relating to the young man's recent loss by the death of Count Bezukhov
greatly afflicted by the death of the father he had hardly known), and
her melancholy was just like the august melancholy she showed at the
mention of her most august Majesty the Empress Marya Fedorovna. Pierre
her drawing room with her habitual skill. The large group, in which
diplomat. Another group was at the tea table. Pierre wished to join
the former, but Anna Pavlovna--who was in the excited condition of a
Pierre, touched his sleeve with her finger, saying:
"Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening." (She
to my poor aunt who adores you. Go and keep her company for ten
minutes. And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear count
who will not refuse to accompany you."
looking as if she had to give some final necessary instructions.
"Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointing to the stately
comes from her heart. Happy the man who wins her! With her the least
Don't you think so? I only wanted to know your opinion," and Anna
Pavlovna let Pierre go.
perfection of manner. If he ever thought of Helene, it was just of her
beauty and her remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in
society.
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemed
show her fear of Anna Pavlovna. She looked at her niece, as if
Anna Pavlovna again touched Pierre's sleeve, saying: "I hope you won't
possibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted. The aunt
coughed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased to
see Helene, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome
and the same look. In the middle of a dull and halting conversation,
Helene turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she
gave to everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so
little meaning for him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt
was just speaking of a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to
Helene asked to see the portrait of the aunt's husband on the box lid.
celebrated miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take the
snuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table.
He half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him the
make room, and looked round with a smile. She was, as always at
evening parties, wearing a dress such as was then fashionable, cut
very low at front and back. Her bust, which had always seemed like
marble to Pierre, was so close to him that his shortsighted eyes could
to his lips that he need only have bent his head a little to have
touched them. He was conscious of the warmth of her body, the scent of
her marble beauty forming a complete whole with her dress, but all the
this he could not help being aware it, just as we cannot renew an
illusion we have once seen through.
who may belong to anyone--to you too," said her glance. And at that
moment Pierre felt that Helene not only could, but must, be his
wife, and that it could not be otherwise.
he did not even know if it would be a good thing (he even felt, he
knew not why, that it would be a bad thing), but he knew it would
Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more
for a tree after he has once recognized it to be a tuft of grass.
between them there was no longer any barrier except the barrier of his
own will.
"Well, I will leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna's
voice, "I see you are all right there."
And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done
that everyone knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.
A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pavlovna
said to him: "I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?"
house done up.
"That's a good thing, but don't move from Prince Vasili's. It is
good to have a friend like the prince," she said, smiling at Prince
Vasili. "I know something about that. Don't I? And you are still so
woman's privilege."
She paused, as women always do, expecting something after they
she continued, uniting them both in one glance. Pierre did not look at
Helene nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. He
of what had happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had merely
beauty was mentioned he had said absent-mindedly: "Yes, she's good
"There is something nasty, something wrong, in the feeling she excites
in me. I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with
her and she with him, that there was quite a scandal and that that's
why he was sent away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasili is her
father... It's bad...." he reflected, but while he was thinking this
was conscious that another line of thought had sprung up, and while
his wife, how she would love him become quite different, and how all
only veiled by its gray dress. "But no! Why did this thought never
occur to me before?" and again he told himself that it was impossible,
dishonorable, in this marriage. He recalled her former words and looks
and the words and looks of those who had seen them together. He
recalled Anna Pavlovna's words and looks when she spoke to him about
his house, recalled thousands of such hints from Prince Vasili and
bound himself to do something that was evidently wrong and that he
ought not to do. But at the very time he was expressing this
conviction to himself, in another part of his mind her image rose in
In November, 1805, Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of inspection
in four different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as to
visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son
Prince Vasili's house where he was staying, and had been absurd,
"This is all very fine, but things must be settled," said Prince
Vasili to himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that
Pierre who was under such obligations to him ("But never mind that")
was not behaving very well in this matter. "Youth, frivolity...
well, God be with him," thought he, relishing his own goodness of
heart, "but it must be brought to a head. The day after tomorrow
will be Lelya's name day. I will invite two or three people, and if he
yes, my affair. I am her father."
Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" and after the sleepless
night when he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and
that he ought to avoid her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision,
had not left Prince Vasili's and felt with terror that in people's
eyes he was every day more and more connected with her, that it was
impossible for him to return to his former conception of her, that
he could not break away from her, and that though it would be a
having an evening party at which Pierre had to be present unless he
expectation. Prince Vasili, in the rare moments when he was at home,
would take Pierre's hand in passing and draw it downwards, or
absent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled, clean-shaven cheek for Pierre
to kiss and would say: "Till tomorrow," or, "Be in to dinner or I
And though Prince Vasili, when he stayed in (as he said) for
felt unable to disappoint him. Every day he said to himself one and
the same thing: "It is time I understood her and made up my mind
she is not stupid, she is an excellent girl," he sometimes said to
himself "she never makes a mistake, never says anything stupid. She
she is not stupid. She never was abashed and is not abashed now, so
or think aloud in her company, and she had always answered him
anything else showed Pierre her superiority. She was right in
regarding all arguments as nonsense in comparison with that smile.
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant
the general smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that
everyone was waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line,
incomprehensible terror seized him at the thought of that dreadful
step. A thousand times during that month and a half while he felt
himself: "What am I doing? I need resolution. Can it be that I have
He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this
Anna Pavlovna's, an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire
paralyzed his will.
On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own people--as his
wife said--met for supper at Prince Vasili's. All these friends and
relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young girl
would be decided that evening. The visitors were seated at supper.
Princess Kuragina, a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome,
was sitting at the head of the table. On either side of her sat the
more important guests--an old general and his wife, and Anna
supper: he went round the table in a merry mood, sitting down now by
one, now by another, of the guests. To each of them he made some
careless and agreeable remark except to Pierre and Helene, whose
presence he seemed not to notice. He enlivened the whole party. The
the ladies' toilets and the gold and silver of the men's epaulets;
plates, knives, and glasses mingled with the animated hum of several
conversations. At one end of the table, the old chamberlain was
heard assuring an old baroness that he loved her passionately, at
misfortunes of some Mary Viktorovna or other. At the center of the
table, Prince Vasili attracted everybody's attention. With a facetious
smile on his face, he was telling the ladies about last Wednesday's
meeting of the Imperial Council, at which Sergey Kuzmich
received and read the then famous rescript of the Emperor Alexander
receiving from all sides declarations of the people's loyalty, that
the declaration from Petersburg gave him particular pleasure, and that
he was proud to be at the head of such a nation and would endeavor
to be worthy of it. This rescript began with the words: "Sergey
Kuzmich, From all sides reports reach me," etc.
"Well, and so he never got farther than: 'Sergey Kuzmich'?" asked
laughing, "'Sergey Kuzmich... From all sides... From all sides...
Sergey Kuzmich...' Poor Vyazmitinov could not get any farther! He
he sobbed, 'Kuz-mi-ch,' tears, and 'From all sides' was smothered in
sobs and he could get no farther. And again his handkerchief, and
"Kuzmich... From all sides... and then tears," someone repeated
laughing.
holding up a threatening finger. "He is such a worthy and excellent
man, our dear Vyazmitinov...."
Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, where
table, a suppressed smile brightening both their faces, a smile that
own feelings. But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and joked,
much as they enjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and however
they avoided looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant
as they seemed of them, one could feel by the occasional glances
they gave that the story about Sergey Kuzmich, the laughter, and the
food were all a pretense, and that the whole attention of that company
was directed to--Pierre and Helene. Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbing
Pavlovna threatened him on behalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov," and in
her eyes, which, for an instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasili read
the old lady next to her and glanced angrily at her daughter, and
her sigh seemed to say: "Yes, there's nothing left for you and me
the happy faces of the lovers. "That's happiness!"
Into the insignificant, trifling, and artificial interests uniting
that society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a
healthy and handsome young man and woman for one another. And this
animation was evidently forced. Not only the guests but even the
footmen waiting at table seemed to feel this, and they forgot their
duties as they looked at the beautiful Helene with her radiant face
and at the red, broad, and happy though uneasy face of Pierre. It
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased
and embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some
occupation. He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only
reality shot unexpectedly through his mind.
How quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself
alone, but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They
dazzling shoulders close to his eyes.
awkward to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a lucky
consoled himself. "And besides, what have I done to bring it about?
How did it begin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili. Then
played cards with her and picked up her reticule and drove out with
her. How did it begin, when did it all come about?" And here he was
sitting by her side as her betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her
flattered by this general admiration he would expand his chest,
raise his head, and rejoice at his good fortune. Suddenly he heard a
fellow."
Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling
at him and Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thought
childlike smile, and Helene smiled too.
Vasili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a
dispute.
"How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre.
After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the
drawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without taking
leave of Helene. Some, as if unwilling to distract her from an
mournful silence as he left the drawing room. He pictured the vanity
of his diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's happiness. The
old general grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was.
"Oh, the old fool," he thought. "That Princess Helene will be
beautiful still when she's fifty."
princess, kissing her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd have
daughter's happiness.
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a
sitting. He had often before, during the last six weeks, remained
that it was inevitable, but he could not make up his mind to take
inner voice whispered to him. "This happiness is for those who have
But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether
manner that this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest
gave him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just
expression of severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards,
made him sit down, and smiled affectionately.
"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and
addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural
Prince Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.
And he again turned to Pierre.
"Sergey Kuzmich--From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the top
button of his waistcoat.
Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the
story about Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then,
and Prince Vasili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered
something and went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince
was disconcerted. The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the
world touched Pierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemed
fault."
"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and
he again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey
properly. Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.
When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the princess, his
wife, was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.
"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."
"Marriages are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.
seemed to be dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.
"Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."
The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified
and indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room.
"Still the same," she said to her husband.
Prince Vasili frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and
his face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him.
Shaking himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps
went past the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps he
went joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant
that Pierre rose in alarm on seeing it.
"Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everything!"
(He put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)--"My
dear boy... Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "I
loved your father... and she will make you a good wife... God bless
He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with
his malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.
"Princess, come here!" he shouted.
her handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful
Helene's hand several times. After a while they were left alone again.
"All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thought Pierre, "so
it is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because
it's definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre held
as it rose and fell.
"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.
"Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointing to his
kiss it, but with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she
"Je vous aime!"* he said, remembering what has to be said at such
himself.
Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili
him a visit. "I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of
course I shall think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see
son Anatole is accompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope you
emulating his father, he feels for you."
"It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors
are coming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the
Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.
A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one
evening in advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.
Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili's
character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and
Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors. And
changed into a feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever
he mentioned him. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival, Prince
Bolkonski was particularly discontented and out of temper. Whether
he was in a bad temper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whether
had already advised the architect not to go to the prince with his
report.
"Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect's
collar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the day
before and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in the
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still
visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of
went through the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the
"Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man,
back to the house.
"The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."
The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "God be
"It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I
The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,
frowning.
"What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in his
shrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess my
"Your honor, I thought..."
"You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and more
rapidly and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackgaurds!...
instinctively avoided the blow. "Thought... Blackguards..." shouted
the prince rapidly.
But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding
the stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly
did not lift his stick again but hurried into the house.
Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew
that the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselle
same as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with
downcast eyes. What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such
not. She thought: "If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not
sympathize with him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he
will say (as he has done before) that I'm in the dumps."
The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted.
thought--referring to the little princess who was not in the dining
room.
"Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?"
"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a
"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the
appear.
"Heaven knows what a fright might do."
and with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not
realize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "His
Excellency Prince Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" she
service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don't
understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don't
today? Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called
him this morning?"
Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
after the soup the prince became more genial.
maid. She grew pale on seeing her father-in-law.
She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her
"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the
prince's question as to how she felt.
"Do you want anything?"
"No, merci, mon pere."
"Well, all right, all right."
"Has the snow been shoveled back?"
"Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only
"All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing his
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and
then proceeded to his study.
Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by
Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo
before a table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly
continual round of amusement which someone for some reason had to
provide for him. And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and
has so much money? That never does any harm," thought Anatole.
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his
father's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.
Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked round
mentioned during the journey.
"Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious
with the old prince."
"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't
"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
the drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with
him." The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror.
The little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received
from Masha, the lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome
with what difficulty the father had dragged his legs upstairs while
the son had followed him like an eagle, three steps at a time.
Bourienne, whose chattering voices had reached her from the
corridor, went into Princess Mary's room.
in, and sinking heavily into an armchair.
morning, but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully
done and her face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its
society, it was still more noticeable how much plainer she had become.
Some unobtrusive touch had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's
toilet which rendered her fresh and pretty face yet more attractive.
"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she
room and we shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself
The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and
should be dressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact
would be to betray her agitation, while to decline their offers to
dress her would prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed,
took on the unattractive martyrlike expression it so often wore, as
she submitted herself to Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these
plain that neither of them could think of her as a rival, so they
began dressing her with perfect sincerity, and with the naive and firm
conviction women have that dress can make a face pretty.
"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, looking
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroon
dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
placed in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged
lower on the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They
and that however they might change the setting and adornment of that
face, it would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three
had been arranged on the top of her head (a style that quite altered
pale-blue scarf, the little princess walked twice round her, now
adjusting a fold of the dress with her little hand, now arranging
"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No,
Mary, really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little
Mademoiselle Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling
the mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to
"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more
little effort."
The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to
Princess Mary.
said.
The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who
was laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping
of birds.
"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.
birds was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large,
"At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess.
"Didn't I tell you," she went on, turning reproachfully to
not suit in the least. Not in the least! Please change it."
to me," answered a voice struggling with tears.
Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to
themselves that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse
expression in Princess Mary did not frighten them (she never
face, she became mute and was not to be shaken in her determination.
"You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary
request, she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look
in her glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with
strangely attractive being rose in her imagination, and carried her
into a totally different happy world of his own. She fancied a
gazing tenderly at her and the child. "But no, it is impossible, I
am too ugly," she thought.
"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the
She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking,
and before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and,
love for a man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess
Mary dreamed of happiness and of children, but her strongest, most
deeply hidden longing was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide
this feeling from others and even from herself, the stronger it
fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thy will?" And scarcely had she
put that question than God gave her the answer in her own heart.
"Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, be not anxious or
envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden from thee,
but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it be God's
will to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfill
His will." With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for the
fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed,
and having crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown and
could all that matter in comparison with the will of God, without
Whose care not a hair of man's head can fall?
CHAPTER IV
When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her
heels, the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little
the impression "Marie" produced on the visitors. And she saw
Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and pretty face, and her
moving toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasili approached
first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her hand and
answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, she
remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still
could not see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and
struck by his beauty. Anatole stood with his right thumb under a
button of his uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in,
slightly swinging one foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked
thinking about her at all. Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready
or eloquent in conversation, but he had the faculty, so invaluable
lacking in self-confidence remains dumb on a first introduction and
was evident that he could be silent in this way for a very long
women Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in them
curiosity, awe, and even love--a supercilious consciousness of his own
you, but why should I bother about you? You'd be only too glad, of
as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect to
playful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and
consisting in the assumption that between the person they so address
and themselves there are some semi-private, long-established jokes and
as none existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone
into these amusing recollections of things that had never occurred.
herself pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences.
"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in
French) to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's* receptions
where you always ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"
"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"
"Oh, yes!"
Anatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your
brother Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her
"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to his
son and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run away
and he had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he
door? Oh, she is a pearl among women, Princess," he added, turning
She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since
answered the Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a
smile, talked to her about her native land. When he saw the pretty
little Bourienne, Anatole came to the conclusion that he would not
find Bald Hills dull either. "Not at all bad!" he thought, examining
along with her when we're married, la petite est gentille."*
him. "What are Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince
specimen," he grumbled to himself. What angered him was that the
The question was whether he could ever bring himself to part from
be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And who would
connections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, and
dressing, and yet the question he was always putting off demanded an
immediate answer. Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident
intention of proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask
"Well, I've nothing against it," the prince said to himself, "but he
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing
princess' dress, Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's
and the loneliness of his daughter amid the general conversation. "Got
"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"
"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual
love and befriend him."
Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.
"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come and
kiss me," and he offered his cheek.
perfect composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his
and began questioning him about political affairs and news. He
seemed to listen attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept
glancing at Princess Mary.
daughter.
the visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you
are never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent."
a blush.
"Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,
turning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted."
"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile
"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taught
to read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me,
my dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old
man, scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.
"Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the
Well, are you off to the front?"
attached... what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole,
turning to his father with a laugh.
"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"
laughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. Suddenly
Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.
"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"
"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The
Prince Vasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were
alone together, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to the
"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from
her?" said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it
tomorrow! Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better.
in your presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can
stay and I'll see." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's all
from his son.
"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a
keen-sighted companion. "You know, you see right through people.
Anatole is no genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an
"All right, all right, we'll see!"
time without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women
till then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing
immediately increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have
been passed in darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full
Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
absorbed all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave,
Thousands of dreams of a future family life continually rose in her
imagination. She drove them away and tried to conceal them.
"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to be
reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him
already, but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine
that I do not like him."
And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to
Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's
woman without any definite position, without relations or even a
Bolkonski, to reading aloud to him and being friends with Princess
prince who, able to appreciate at a glance her superiority to the
prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew a story, heard from her aunt but
finished in her own way, which she liked to repeat to herself. It
was the story of a girl who had been seduced, and to whom her poor
tears as in imagination she told this story to him, her seducer. And
now he, a real Russian prince, had appeared. He would carry her away
she was talking to Anatole about Paris. It was not calculation that
guided her (she did not even for a moment consider what she should
do), but all this had long been familiar to her, and now that
Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around him and she
wished and tried to please him as much as possible.
The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,
Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle
Mademoiselle Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully
poetic world and the look she felt upon her made that world still more
poetic. But Anatole's expression, though his eyes were fixed on her,
referred not to her but to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's
clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne was also looking at Princess
Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy and
hope that was also new to the princess.
"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now,
Can it be possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face,
but still feeling his eyes gazing at her.
In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
kissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the
courage, but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came
and kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, but
then he did everything so simply and with such assurance!)
Mademoiselle Bourienne flushed, and gave the princess a frightened
look.
value her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and
"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are
behaving well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she
said. And smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.
They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as
he got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.
"Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind--yes,
kind, that is the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, which
she had seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round,
also this man with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.
Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a
long time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at
someone, now working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of
The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly
made. She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every
position was awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her
now more than ever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled
to her the time when she was not like that and when everything was
nightcap and Katie, sleepy and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy
repeated. "I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not my
fault!" and her voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.
The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard
he had been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more
consider the whole matter and decide what was right and how he
"The first man that turns up--she forgets her father and
knew I should notice it. Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that
how is it she has not pride enough to see it? If she has no pride
for herself she might at least have some for my sake! She must be
Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but I'll let her see...."
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
thought, he called Tikhon and began to undress.
"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting
the nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "I
never invited them. They came to disturb my life--and there is not
much of it left."
"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by
the shirt.
Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
his master's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince
Vasili and his son.
"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency."
"No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his
feet into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing
Bourienne, they quite understood one another as to the first part of
their romance, up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; they
understood that they had much to say to one another in private and
so they had been seeking an opportunity since morning to meet one
another alone. When Princess Mary went to her father's room at the
usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and Anatole met in the
conservatory.
Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special
her fate would be decided that day, but that they also knew what she
thought about it. She read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince
hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with an
unnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has not
referred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful
eyes. Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as you
know my principles, I refer it to you."
"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing
pale and then blushing.
you on his pupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'How
understand it'!... And I ask you!"
"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.
"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going to
The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with
would only be able to submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to
time to finish. The old prince interrupted her.
"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry
wife, while you..."
his daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.
"Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this,
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
choose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness
depends on your decision. Never mind me!"
"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry
think it over, and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence:
yes or no. I know you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but
still shouted when the princess, as if lost in a fog, had already
staggered out of the study.
said about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be
it. She was going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing
away saw Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to
her. With a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole
waist of Mademoiselle Bourienne who had not yet seen her.
"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say.
Princess Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand
it. At last Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole
bowed to Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in
a laugh at this strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders
went to the door that led to his own apartments.
An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old
hair. The princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance
were looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle
Bourienne's pretty face.
"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said
"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand
being so carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."
out.
entered. He hurriedly took a pinch of snuff.
"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both
daughter!"
He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.
shouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also.
Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turning
to Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?"
"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my
life from yours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively,
glancing at Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes.
Bolkonski, frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kiss
her, but only bending his forehead to hers just touched it, and
"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never
forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
this heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is so
"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you
"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have
"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "My
passionately repents. I will do all I can to arrange the match between
them. If he is not rich I will give her the means; I will ask my
unfortunate, a stranger, alone, helpless! And, oh God, how
Perhaps I might have done the same!..." thought Princess Mary.
It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till
midwinter was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son's
handwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm
and haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read
the letter.
Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the
house, on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the
room and found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing
"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry,
prepared to sympathize in any way.
The count sobbed yet more.
tell the little countess!"
Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief
At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war
news and about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been
they might very likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each
adroitly turned the conversation to insignificant matters. Natasha,
who, of the whole family, was the most gifted with a capacity to
feel any shades of intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her
some secret between her father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had
sensitive her mother was to anything relating to Nikolenka, did not
venture to ask any questions at dinner, but she was too excited to eat
governess' remarks. After dinner, she rushed head long after Anna
as she overtook her in the sitting room.
"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"
"Nothing, my dear."
"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up--I know you know
"You are a little slyboots," she said.
"But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your
"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell at
letter, on condition that she should tell no one.
"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.
Natasha, seeing the impression the of her brother's wound produced
"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
glad, very glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself
so. You are all blubberers and understand nothing."
"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.
"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an
"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceived
Petya paced the room in silence for a time.
"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of
those Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have
killed so many that there'd have been a heap of them."
"Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"
"I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.
"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's
silence.
Sonya smiled.
"Do I remember Nicholas?"
perfectly, remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressive
gesture, evidently wishing to give her words a very definite
meaning. "I remember Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said.
"It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not
as I remember Nikolenka. Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but
"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her
friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to
said nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there
anything like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.
"Shall you write to him?" she asked.
an officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of
taken on himself?
"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,
"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"
"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to."
"Why should you be ashamed?"
"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."
previous remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one in
Natasha's Italian singing master), "that's why she's ashamed!"
"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.
"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya,
with the air of an old brigadier.
The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at
eyes fixed on a miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a
with the letter, came on tiptoe to the countess' door and paused.
"Come later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.
At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna
Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then
expression of a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation
and admits the public to appreciate his skill.
"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait
and in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her
When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him,
embraced his bald head, over which she again looked at the letter
and the portrait, and in order to press them again to her lips, she
slightly pushed away the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya
had taken part, and his promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his
to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom he loved and thought of just the
into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks turned upon her, ran
away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at full speed with her
dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and smiling, plumped
down on the floor. The countess was crying.
"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one
should be glad and not cry."
This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked
countess.
Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were
did not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses,
and Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the
fresh proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary,
how joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of
about whom she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count,
that son who had first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that
this son should now be away in a foreign land amid strange
showing that children do grow imperceptibly from the cradle to
manhood, at each of its stages, had seemed as extraordinary to her
as if there had never existed the millions of human beings who grew up
that little creature could be this strong, brave man, this model son
"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading the
descriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word about
himself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he
remembered everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was
For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied
out, while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of
the count, money and all things necessary for the uniform and
with army authorities to secure advantageous means of communication
for herself and her son. She had opportunities of sending her
Guards. The Rostovs supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was
quite a definite address, and that if a letter reached the Grand
same neighborhood. And so it was decided to send the letters and money
by the Grand Duke's courier to Boris and Boris was to forward them
to Nicholas. The letters were from the old count, the countess, Petya,
Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and finally there were six thousand rubles
CHAPTER VII
On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before
Olmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--the
straight to the review, reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.
that the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles
from Olmutz and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money
for him. Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops,
after their active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp
celebrating awards they had received for the campaign, and made
had recently opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses.
Rostov, who had just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought
the sutlers. On receiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellow
officer to Olmutz, dined there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set
yet had time to get his uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket,
decorated with a soldier's cross, equally shabby cadet's riding
breeches lined with worn leather, and an officer's saber with a
Cossack during the campaign, and he wore a crumpled hussar cap stuck
thought how he would impress Boris and all his comrades of the
The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip,
parading their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy
themselves), the officers on foot and at their proper posts. Boris had
been quartered, and had marched all the way, with Berg who was already
in command of a company. Berg, who had obtained his captaincy during
the campaign, had gained the confidence of his superiors by his
promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money matters very
satisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, had made the
acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by a
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to
having rested after yesterday's march, were sitting, clean and
neatly dressed, at a round table in the clean quarters allotted to
them, playing chess. Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees.
Boris, in the accurate way characteristic of him, was building a
"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.
his hand.
At that moment the door opened.
"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, you
"Dear me, how you have changed!"
Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady
and replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace
youth, that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a
Nicholas wished to do something special on meeting his friend. He
wanted to pinch him, push him, do anything but kiss him--a thing
changes in the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which
they last met and both were in a hurry to show the changes that had
taken place in them.
and with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his
loud voice, popped her head in at the door.
"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.
"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did
not expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday
Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. George
"As you see," he said.
"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had a
splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rode
with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every
advantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! I
can't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all our
officers."
his hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the
pleasures and advantages of service under members of the Imperial
family.
"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."
"If you really want it," said he.
He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and
sent for wine.
arms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he
the letter.
our pay. I can tell you for myself..."
"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letter
everything over with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be
out of your way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he
amiably into his face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his
my heart as to an old acquaintance."
getting up and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.
"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.
Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having
been noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.
"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the
"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them
"Well, have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have
Mikhaylovna's advice had obtained through an acquaintance and sent
"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter
"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want
it for!"
"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."
"Why not?" inquired Boris.
"It's a lackey's job!"
"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the
point... Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.
"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try
to make as successful a career of it as possible."
He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently
"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink
with you. I can't."
"Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?"
asked Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.
"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered
Boris.
Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg
returned, and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three
spoke of the sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke,
and told stories of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual,
kept silent when the subject did not relate to himself, but in
connection with the stories of the Grand Duke's quick temper he
related with gusto how in Galicia he had managed to deal with the
annoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With a pleasant smile
Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in a violent
knew I was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know
the Army Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do
the Lord's Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my
company, and so my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Berg
stood up and showed how he presented himself, with his hand to his
greater respect and self-complacency than his did.) "Well, he
remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The next day it was not
emitting rings of smoke.
"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.
But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and
it, and as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of
battle generally do describe it, that is, as they would like it to
have been, as they have heard it described by others, and as sounds
and would on no account have told a deliberate lie. He began his story
meaning to tell everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly,
the truth to his hearers--who like himself had often heard stories
of attacks and had formed a definite idea of what an attack was and
cavalry attacks had not happened to him. He could not tell them simply
that everyone went at a trot and that he fell off his horse and
would have been necessary to make an effort of will to tell only
what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth, and young
people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story of how
beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like a
In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannot
imagine what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack,"
Prince Andrew, whom Boris was expecting, entered the room. Prince
Andrew, who liked to help young men, was flattered by being asked
managed to please him the day before, he wished to do what the young
man wanted. Having been sent with papers from Kutuzov to the
pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he looked at
sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.
Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was a
mere stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too
seemed ashamed of the hussar of the line.
In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of
the contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of
became silent. Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff,
"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently
reluctant to say more in the presence of a stranger.
Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as
would be doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that
he could give no opinion on such an important government order, and
Berg laughed gaily.
"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris,
me after the review and we will do what is possible."
And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to
changing to anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I
aide-de-camp.
Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him.
With a slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many
"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly
grown furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But
our stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's
fellows on the staff who get rewards without doing anything!"
"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet
and particularly amiable smile.
A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this
man's self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.
"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and,
frankly, I don't want to. I am speaking of the staff in general."
"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of
quiet authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree
with you that it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient
self-respect, but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen.
In a day or two we shall all have to take part in a greater and more
serious duel, and besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of
yours, is not at all to blame that my face has the misfortune to
displease you. However," he added rising, "you know my name and
where to find me, but don't forget that I do not regard either
myself or you as having been at all insulted, and as a man older
than you, my advice is to let the matter drop. Well then, on Friday
after the review I shall expect you, Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed
Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them both he went out.
He ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode
home. Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that
that worried him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he
would have at seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud
man when covered by his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of
all the men he knew there was none he would so much like to have for a
friend as that very adjutant whom he so hated.
The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the
and those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors,
the Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the
Archduke, inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.
forming up on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and
bayonets moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with
banners flying, formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other
and green braided uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front
mounted on black, roan, or gray horses; then again, spreading out with
gun carriages and with the smell of linstocks, came the artillery
which crawled between the infantry and cavalry and took up its
appointed position. Not only the generals in full parade uniforms,
necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and wearing scarves and all
coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay smooth-
affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
yet at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that
From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by
lines: the cavalry in front, behind it the artillery, and behind
that again the infantry.
three parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's
fighting army (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front);
under one command, and in a like order.
They're coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final
preparation swept over all the troops.
approaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light
the lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their
staffs. It looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was
expressing its joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was
heard shouting: "Eyes front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at
sunrise, this was repeated by others from various sides and all became
silent.
In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard.
march. It seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as
the Emperor Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of
continuously, and joyfully that the men themselves were awed by
Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar
approached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man in
that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of
triumph.
water, commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and
so he could not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence
of that word.
"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment
after another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and
roar.
Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and
of those voices, amid the square masses of troops standing
suites moved carelessly but symmetrically and above all freely, and in
tensely passionate attention of that whole mass of men was
concentrated.
attention.
had recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within
twenty paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of
his handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling tenderness
Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in
still stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show
that love in some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready
"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?"
thought Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"
thank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a
if only to express his rapture fully.
The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if
undecided.
"How can the Emperor be undecided?" thought Rostov, but then even
this indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like
That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar's foot, in the
narrow pointed boot then fashionable, touched the groin of the
bobtailed bay mare he rode, his hand in a white glove gathered up
the reins, and he moved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying
sea of aides-de-camp. Farther and farther he rode away, stopping at
other regiments, till at last only his white plumes were visible to
Rostov from amid the suites that surrounded the Emperors.
quarrel of yesterday and the question presented itself whether he
ought or ought not to challenge Bolkonski. "Of course not!" he now
thought. "Is it worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment?
At a time of such love, such rapture, and such self-sacrifice, what do
any of our quarrels and affronts matter? I love and forgive
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops
began a ceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recently
purchased from Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron-
his chest, his tail extended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the
high and graceful action, as if flying through the air without
touching the ground.
feeling himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a
frowning but blissful face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressed
"Fine fellows, the Pavlograds!" remarked the Emperor.
fire this instant!" thought Rostov.
about the Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, about
But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander.
They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible against
himself they could not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might:
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two
battles would have made them.
comrade Berg's best wishes for success, rode to Olmutz to see
important personage, a position in the army which seemed to him most
attractive. "It is all very well for Rostov, whose father sends him
ten thousand rubles at a time, to talk about not wishing to cringe
to anybody and not be anyone's lackey, but I who have nothing but my
brains have to make a career and must not miss opportunities, but must
avail myself of them!" he reflected.
of the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were
stationed and the two Emperors were living with their suites,
exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages
with their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military
men, seemed so immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of the
Guards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, be
aware of his existence. At the quarters of the commander in chief,
Kutuzov, where he inquired for Bolkonski, all the adjutants and even
the orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a
Bolkonski. Prince Andrew was in and Boris was shown into a large
hall probably formerly used for dancing, but in which five beds now
stood, and furniture of various kinds: a table, chairs, and a
clavichord. One adjutant, nearest the door, was sitting at the table
Nesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms under his head, laughing with an
waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on the clavichord, sang
the tune. Bolkonski was not there. None of these gentlemen changed his
and that he should go through the door on the left into the
reception room if he wished to see him. Boris thanked him and went
(with that peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says,
"If it were not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment"), was
listening to an old Russian general with decorations, who stood very
erect, almost on tiptoe, with a soldier's obsequious expression on his
purple face, reporting something.
the general, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation he
Prince Andrew, paying no more heed to the general who ran after him
a cheerful smile.
At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised,
that in the army, besides the subordination and discipline
regiment, there was another, more important, subordination, which made
Prince Andrew, for his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant
Drubetskoy. More than ever was Boris resolved to serve in future not
now that merely by having been recommended to Prince Andrew he had
already risen above the general who at the front had the power to
"I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussing
about with Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the
it!"
Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to
as something generally known. But it the first time he had heard
"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have
been thinking about you."
"Yes, I was thinking"--for some reason Boris could not help
from Prince Kuragin about me. I only wanted to ask because I fear
the Guards won't be in action," he added as if in apology.
"All right, all right. We'll talk it over," replied Prince Andrew.
"Only let me report this gentleman's business, and I shall be at
your disposal."
While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general,
advantages of the unwritten code of subordination--looked so fixedly
had to say to the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfortable. He turned
away and waited impatiently for Prince Andrew's return from the
commander in chief's room.
"You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you," said
Prince Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the
clavichord was. "It's no use your going to the commander in chief.
not be bad as regards the unwritten code," thought Boris), "but
nothing more would come of it. There will soon be a battalion of us
aides-de-camp and adjutants! But this is what we'll do: I have a
good friend, an adjutant general and an excellent fellow, Prince
Kutuzov with his staff and all of us count for nothing. Everything
is now centered round the Emperor. So we will go to Dolgorukov; I have
to go there anyhow and I have already spoken to him about you. We
shall see whether he cannot attach you to himself or find a place
Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a
young man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtaining
help of this kind for another, which from pride he would never
accept for himself, he kept in touch with the circle which confers
success and which attracted him. He very readily took up Boris'
cause and went with him to Dolgorukov.
It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmutz
occupied by the Emperors and their retinues.
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the
council, contrary to the views of the old generals Kutuzov and
Prince Schwartzenberg, it had been decided to advance immediately
Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris arrived at the palace to find
Dolgorukov. Everyone at headquarters was still under the spell of
The voices of those who counseled delay and advised waiting for
something else before advancing had been so completely silenced and
their arguments confuted by such conclusive evidence of the advantages
longer seemed to be in the future but in the past. All the
advantages were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly superior
to Napoleon's, were concentrated in one place, the troops inspired
by the Emperors' presence were eager for action. The strategic
position where the operations would take place was familiar in all its
details to the Austrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident had
the very fields where the French had now to be fought; the adjacent
locality was known and shown in every detail on the maps, and
of the victory that had been gained. Prince Andrew introduced his
said nothing to Boris and, evidently unable to suppress the thoughts
which were uppermost in his mind at that moment, addressed Prince
Andrew in French.
"Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that
dear fellow," he said abruptly and eagerly, "I must confess to
having been unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother.
What exactitude, what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what
foresight for every eventuality, every possibility even to the
smallest detail! No, my dear fellow, no conditions better than our
present ones could have been devised. This combination of Austrian
"So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski.
has decidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was received
"Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bolkonski.
"What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gain
course not as 'Emperor,' it seemed to me it should be to 'General
"But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling him
General Bonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski.
know Bilibin--he's a very clever fellow. He suggested addressing him
Dolgorukov laughed merrily.
"Only that?" said Bolkonski.
address. He is a wise and clever fellow."
"To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvernement
it?"
"Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski.
delightful!"
And the talkative Dolgorukov, turning now to Boris, now to Prince
purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking
at Markov, probably expecting Markov to pick it up for him, and how
Markov immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up
"Delightful!" said Bolkonski. "But I have come to you, Prince, as
Dolgorukov to the Emperor.
"Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolgorukov, getting up hurriedly and
good-natured, sincere, and animated levity. "But you see... another
time!"
Boris was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher
that here he was in contact with the springs that set in motion the
enormous movements of the mass of which in his regiment he felt
himself a tiny, obedient, and insignificant atom. They followed Prince
Dolgorukov out into the corridor and met--coming out of the door of
civilian clothes with a clever face and sharply projecting jaw
shiftiness of expression. This short man nodded to Dolgorukov as to an
step out of his way. Prince Andrew did neither: a look of animosity
appeared on his face and the other turned away and went down the
side of the corridor.
"Who was that?" asked Boris.
"He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of men-
such men as he who decide the fate of nations," added Bolkonski with a
Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle
Nicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration's detachment,
moved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing into
action as arranged, and after going behind other columns for about two
thirds of a mile was stopped on the highroad. Rostov saw the
infantry battalions and artillery pass by and go forward and then
All the fear before action which he had experienced as previously, all
distinguishing himself as a true hussar in this battle, had been
that day in a dull and wretched mood. At nine in the morning, he heard
back (there were not many of them), and at last he saw how a whole
of Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and, though not big, had
of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town of Wischau and
the capture of a whole French squadron. The day was bright and sunny
by the tales of those who had taken part in it, but also by the joyful
adjutants, as they passed Rostov going or coming. And Nicholas, who
had vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent
that happy day in inactivity, was all the more depressed.
"Come here, Wostov. Let's dwink to dwown our gwief!" shouted
food.
The officers gathered round Denisov's canteen, eating and talking.
"There! They are bringing another!" cried one of the officers,
indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot
by two Cossacks.
had taken from the prisoner.
"Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks.
The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner.
accent. He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when
he heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers,
addressing first one, then another. He said he would not have been
seize some horsecloths, though he had told him the Russians were
there. And at every word he added: "But don't hurt my little horse!"
and stroked the animal. It was plain that he did not quite grasp where
he was. Now he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now,
discipline and zeal in the service. He brought with him into our
rearguard all the freshness of atmosphere of the French army, which
The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostov, being
the richest of the officers now that he had received his money, bought
it.
"But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian good-naturedly
to Rostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar.
Rostov smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money.
"The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly heard among the hussars.
All began to run and bustle, and Rostov saw coming up the road
behind him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment
everyone was in his place, waiting.
Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected
thought of himself had vanished. He was filled with happiness at his
nearness to the Emperor. He felt that this nearness by itself made
up to him for the day he had lost. He was happy as a lover when the
longed-for moment of meeting arrives. Not daring to look round and
approach. He felt it not only from the sound of the hoofs of the
him. Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun shedding beams of
mild and majestic light around, and already he felt himself
enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm, and
majestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with
the Emperor's voice.
"The Pavlograd hussars?" he inquired.
to that which had said: "The Pavlograd hussars?"
The Emperor drew level with Rostov and halted. Alexander's face
the face of the majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveying the
going on in Rostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he understood
Then all at once he raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse
with his left foot, and galloped on.
battle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at
galloped toward the vanguard. Before he came up with the hussars,
several adjutants met him with news of the successful result of the
This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron,
battlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and were
retreating against their will. A few minutes after the Emperor had
passed, the Pavlograd division was ordered to advance. In Wischau
itself, a petty German town, Rostov saw the Emperor again. In the
market place, where there had been some rather heavy firing before the
Emperor's arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom
there had not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his
suite of officers and courtiers, was riding a bobtailed chestnut mare,
a different one from that which he had ridden at the review, and
Emperor's rather round shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run
down them, how his left foot began convulsively tapping the horse's
unconcerned and did not stir. An adjutant, dismounting, lifted the
soldier under the arms to place him on a stretcher that had been
brought. The soldier groaned.
"Gently, gently! Can't you do it more gently?" said the Emperor
Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he was
terrible thing! Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!"
sight of the enemy's lines, which all day long had yielded ground to
us at the least firing. The Emperor's gratitude was announced to the
vanguard, rewards were promised, and the men received a double
ration of vodka. The campfires crackled and the soldiers' songs
resounded even more merrily than on the previous night. Denisov
dinners," said he, "but the health of our Sovereign, that good,
enchanting, and great man! Let us drink to his health and to the
certain defeat of the French!"
at Schon Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We
will all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not
saying it right, I have drunk a good deal--but that is how I feel, and
"Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.
And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastically and
chest showing under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in the
Late that night, when all had separated, Denisov with his short hand
patted his favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder.
lofty, beautiful feeling, such a..."
"I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove..."
"No, you don't understand!"
And Rostov got up and went wandering among the campfires, dreaming
of what happiness it would be to die--not in saving the Emperor's life
(he did not even dare to dream of that), but simply to die before
his eyes. He really was in love with the Tsar and the glory of the
Russian arms and the hope of future triumph. And he was not the only
the battle of Austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in the Russian army
unwell. He ate nothing and had slept badly that night, those around
him reported. The cause of this indisposition was the strong
impression made on his sensitive mind by the sight of the killed and
wounded.
At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with a
midday he was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode off
with Prince Dolgorukov to the advanced post of the French army.
It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander a
actuated by a real desire for peace.
Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar,
and remained alone with him for a long time.
of shots retreated. In the highest army circles from midday on the
nineteenth, a great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted
till the morning of the twentieth, when the memorable battle of
Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity--the eager talk, running
to and fro, and dispatching of adjutants--was confined to the
activity reached Kutuzov's headquarters and the staffs of the
to the twentieth, the whole eighty thousand allied troops rose from
their bivouacs to the hum of voices, and the army swayed and started
in one enormous mass six miles long.
The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor's
headquarters in the morning and had started the whole movement that
tower clock. One wheel slowly moved, another was set in motion, and
cogwheels to work, chimes to play, figures to pop out, and the hands
to advance with regular motion as a result of all that activity.
military machine, an impulse once given leads to the final result; and
just as indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is
transmitted to them are the parts of the mechanism which the impulse
comes when the lever catches it and obeying the impulse that wheel
begins to creak and joins in the common motion the result and aim of
which are beyond its ken.
Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of
innumerable wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement
desires, remorse, humiliations, sufferings, outbursts of pride,
fear, and enthusiasm--was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz,
movement of the hand on the dial of human history.
commander in chief.
Bolkonski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the
coming action from Dolgorukov. He felt that Kutuzov was upset and
dissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they were
dissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor's headquarters
"I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be
"But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when
Bonaparte fears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible."
"Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew. "Well, what is
Bonaparte like? How did he impress you?"
general engagement," repeated Dolgorukov, evidently prizing this
Napoleon. "If he weren't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that
interview? Why negotiate, and above all why retreat, when to retreat
afraid, afraid of a general battle. His hour has come! Mark my words!"
"He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call him
That's the sort of man he is, and nothing more," replied Dolgorukov,
"Despite my great respect for old Kutuzov," he continued, "we should
be a nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him a
chance to escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him in
our hands! No, we mustn't forget Suvorov and his rule--not to put
yourself in a position to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Believe
all the experience of old Cunctators."
"But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at the
outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces
are situated," said Prince Andrew.
He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan of attack he had himself
formed.
up he spread a map on the table. "All eventualities have been
foreseen. If he is standing before Brunn..."
And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother's
might have been as good as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantage
that Weyrother's had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew
own plan, Prince Dolgorukov ceased to listen to him and gazed
can say all this there," remarked Dolgorukov.
"I will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.
"Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?" said Bilibin, who,
victory or defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except
your Kutuzov, there is not a single Russian in command of a column!
Prince de Lichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally
Prishprish, and so on like all those Polish names."
now two Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be a
third, Count Arakcheev, if his nerves were not too weak."
"However, I think General Kutuzov has come out," said Prince Andrew.
"I wish you good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added and went out
after shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.
Kutuzov, who was sitting silently beside him, what he thought of
tomorrow's battle.
and asked him to tell the Emperor. What do you think he replied? 'But,
my dear general, I am engaged with rice and cutlets, look after
military matters yourself!' Yes... That was the answer I got!"
CHAPTER XII
Shortly after nine o'clock that evening, Weyrother drove with his
All the commanders of columns were summoned to the commander in
chief's and with the exception of Prince Bagration, who declined to
come, were all there at the appointed time.
Weyrother, who was in full control of the proposed battle, by his
chairman and president of the council of war. Weyrother evidently felt
himself to be at the head of a movement that had already become
unrestrainable. He was like a horse running downhill harnessed to a
heavy cart. Whether he was pulling it or being pushed by it he did not
know, but rushed along at headlong speed with no time to consider what
to the enemy's picket line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to the
headquarters where he had dictated the dispositions in German, and
He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to the
commander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and
not reply to questions put to him. He was bespattered with mud and had
haughty and self-confident.
commander in chief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself,
attend. Prince Andrew came in to inform the commander in chief of this
be present at the council, he remained in the room.
Weyrother, hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table on
chair, with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms.
"Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late," said he, and
pretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading
absorbed by a far more serious matter than a desire to show his
moment, glanced at Kutuzov and, having convinced himself that he was
asleep, took up a paper and in a loud, monotonous voice began to
which he also read out:
"Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz
extends along Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there,
right, it is advantageous to attack the enemy's latter wing especially
if we occupy the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we can
both fall on his flank and pursue him over the plain between
Schlappanitz and the Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of
Schlappanitz and Bellowitz which cover the enemy's front. For this
object it is necessary that... The first column marches... The
second column marches... The third column marches..." and so on,
The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult
seemed not to listen or even to wish to be thought to listen.
Exactly opposite Weyrother, with his glistening wide-open eyes fixed
Miloradovich in a military pose, his elbows turned outwards, his hands
Austrian chief of staff finished reading. Then Miloradovich looked
that significant look whether he agreed or disagreed and was satisfied
who, with a subtle smile that never left his typically southern French
fingers which rapidly twirled by its corners a gold snuffbox on
he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raised his head, and
interrupted Weyrother, wishing to say something. But the Austrian
general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and jerked his elbows, as
if to say: "You can tell me your views later, but now be so good as to
expression of perplexity, turned round to Miloradovich as if seeking
an explanation, but meeting the latter's impressive but meaningless
gaze drooped his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox.
enough to be heard.
Przebyszewski, with respectful but dignified politeness, held his
hand to his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in
attention. Dohkturov, a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with an
conscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliar
locality. He asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had
or at anyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry
out such a plan in which the enemy's position was assumed to be known,
whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.
that he had to do, not with fools, but with men who could teach him
something in military matters.
When the monotonous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzov
opened his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the
remarking, "So you are still at that silly business!" quickly closed
his eye again, and let his head sink still lower.
Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother's
vanity as author of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte might
this plan perfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with a
firm and contemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet all
objections be they what they might.
"If he could attack us, he would have done so today," said he.
"So you think he is powerless?" said Langeron.
treatment of a case.
for support to Miloradovich who was near him.
But Miloradovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anything
battlefield."
Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it
was strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals
and to have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced
retreating, which is the only thing we need fear, or he is changing
his position." (He smiled ironically.) "But even if he also took up
trouble and all our arrangements to the minutest detail remain the
same."
"How is that?..." began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waiting
an opportunity to express his doubts.
Kutuzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the
"Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow--or rather for today,
past midnight. Prince Andrew went out.
express his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy
impression. Whether Dolgorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Langeron,
and the others who did not approve of the plan of attack, were
state his views plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on account
my life, my life," he thought, "must be risked?"
most distant, most intimate, memories rose in his imagination: he
remembered his last parting from his father and his wife; he
emotional and softened mood he went out of the hut in which he was
billeted with Nesvitski and began to walk up and down before it.
The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed
everything may be over for me! All these memories will be no more,
none of them will have any meaning for me. Tomorrow perhaps, even
certainly, I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall
have to show all I can do." And his fancy pictured the battle, its
which he had so long waited, presents itself to him at last. He firmly
Emperors. All are struck by the justness of his views, but no one
undertakes to carry them out, so he takes a regiment, a division-
stipulates that no one is to interfere with his arrangements--leads
his division to the decisive point, and gains the victory alone.
however, did not answer that voice and went on dreaming of his
alone. Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov's staff, but he
removed and he is appointed... "Well and then?" asked the other voice.
well... what then?..." "Well then," Prince Andrew answered himself, "I
don't know what will happen and don't want to know, and can't, but
if I want this--want glory, want to be known to men, want to be
loved by them, it is not my fault that I want it and want nothing
but that and live only for that. Yes, for that alone! I shall never
tell anyone, but, oh God! what am I to do if I love nothing but fame
and men's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of family--I fear nothing.
And precious and dear as many persons are to me--father, sister, wife-
those dearest to me--yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would
whom Prince Andrew knew, and who was called Tit. He was saying,
"Well?" returned the old man.
"Oh, go to the devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the laughter
of the orderlies and servants.
this mist!"
front of Bagration's detachment. His hussars were placed along the
line in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master
the sleepiness that kept coming over him. An enormous space, with
him; in front of him was misty darkness. Rostov could see nothing,
peer as he would into that foggy distance: now something gleamed gray,
now there was something black, now little lights seemed to glimmer
hurriedly opened his eyes and saw close before him the head and ears
paces of them, the black figures of hussars, but in the distance was
still the same misty darkness. "Why not?... It might easily happen,"
thought Rostov, "that the Emperor will meet me and give me an order as
there.' There are many stories of his getting to know an officer in
just such a chance way and attaching him to himself! What if he gave
the truth, how I would unmask his deceivers!" And in order to
with pleasure but whom he would slap in the face before the Emperor.
"Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line... pass and
watchword--shaft, Olmutz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be in
reserve tomorrow," he thought. "I'll ask leave to go to the front,
before I am off duty. I'll take another turn and when I get back
saddle and touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars.
It seemed to him that it was getting lighter. To the left he saw a
sloping descent lit up, and facing it a black knoll that seemed as
steep as a wall. On this knoll there was a white patch that Rostov
could not at all make out: was it a glade in the wood lit up by the
moon, or some unmelted snow, or some white houses? He even thought
bushes here," came the voice of an hussar, past whom Rostov was riding
was I thinking? I mustn't forget. How shall I speak to the Emperor?
No, that's not it--that's tomorrow. Oh yes! Natasha... sabretache...
saber them...Whom? The hussars... Ah, the hussars with mustaches.
Along the Tverskaya Street rode the hussar with mustaches... I thought
about him too, just opposite Guryev's house... Old Guryev.... Oh,
but Denisov's a fine fellow. But that's all nonsense. The chief
say something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not. But
that's nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the important
thing I was thinking of. Yes, Na-tasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes!
once it seemed to him that he was being fired at. "What? What?
What?... Cut them down! What?..." said Rostov, waking up. At the
moment he opened his eyes he heard in front of him, where the
the horse of the hussar near him pricked their ears at these shouts.
and "rrrr!"
beside him. "That must be the enemy's camp!"
"Why, don't you hear it?" Rostov asked again, after waiting for a
reply.
"From the direction, it must be the enemy," repeated Rostov.
"It may be he or it may be nothing," muttered the hussar. "It's
Rostov's horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground,
pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shouting
grew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army
of several thousand men could produce. The lights spread farther and
farther, probably along the line of the French camp. Rostov no
longer wanted to sleep. The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy
he now heard distinctly.
the hussar beside him.
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. The
sound of horse's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars
was heard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of
"Your honor, the generals!" said the sergeant, riding up to Rostov.
reported to him, and then joined the adjutants listening to what the
"Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, "it is
kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us."
they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too....
Officer!" said Bagration to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers still
"They were there this evening, but now I don't know, your
excellency. Shall I go with some of my hussars to see?" replied
Bagration stopped and, before replying, tried to see Rostov's face
"Yes, sir."
Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fedchenko and two other
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the
direction from which the shouting came. He felt both frightened and
pleased to be riding alone with three hussars into that mysterious and
dangerous misty distance where no one had been before him. Bagration
continually discovering his mistakes. Having descended the hill at a
heard the shouting of the French more loudly and distinctly. In the
it he found it was a road. Having come out onto the road he reined
gleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would be
easier to see people coming along it. "Follow me!" said he, crossed
the road, and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the point
where the French pickets had been standing that evening.
"Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him.
And before Rostov had time to make out what the black thing was that
had suddenly appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by a
sound passed out of hearing. Another musket missed fire but flashed in
the pan. Rostov turned his horse and galloped back. Four more
fog singing in different tones. Rostov reined in his horse, whose
spirits had risen, like his own, at the firing, and went back at a
footpace. "Well, some more! Some more!" a merry voice was saying in
Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and had
only lit fires to deceive us.
"It's plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince," said
in the evening," reported Rostov, stooping forward with his hand at
the salute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his
ride and especially by the sound of the bullets.
"What is it?"
"Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attached
"What's your name?"
"Count Rostov."
"Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolgorukov.
But Rostov did not reply.
"Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?"
Emperor," thought Rostov.
"Thank God!"
The fires and shouting in the enemy's army were occasioned by the
l'Empereur!" Napoleon's proclamation was as follows:
Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the
Hollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place. The position
we occupy is a strong one, and while they are marching to go round
myself direct your battalions. I will keep out of fire if you with
your habitual valor carry disorder and confusion into the enemy's
ranks, but should victory be in doubt, even for a moment, you will see
your Emperor exposing himself to the first blows of the enemy, for
at stake is the honor of the French infantry, so necessary to the
honor of our nation.
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Let
every man be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these
victory will conclude our campaign and we can return to winter
quarters, where fresh French troops who are being raised in France
people, of you, and of myself.
NAPOLEON
CHAPTER XIV
At five in the morning it was still quite dark. The troops of the
but on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery,
which were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French
right flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to
which they were throwing everything superfluous, made the eyes
tea and breakfasting, the soldiers, munching biscuit and beating a
tubs, and everything that they did not want or could not carry away
thrust their pipes into their boots, their bags into the carts, got
their muskets ready, and formed rank. The officers buttoned up their
coats, buckled on their swords and pouches, and moved along the
ranks shouting. The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and packed
the wagons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and battalion and
regimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave final
instructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage men who
going.
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his
regiment as much as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has
walked, whatever strange, unknown, and dangerous places he reaches,
just as a sailor is always surrounded by the same decks, masts, and
rigging of his ship, so the soldier always has around him the same
announcing the approach of something decisive and solemn, and
awakening in the men an unusual curiosity. On the day of battle the
regiment, they listen intently, look about, and eagerly ask concerning
what is going on around them.
could not see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees and
level ground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one
advanced for a long time, always in the same fog, descending and
ascending hills, avoiding gardens and enclosures, going over new and
unknown ground, and nowhere encountering the enemy. On the contrary,
other Russian columns were moving in the same direction. Every soldier
more of our men were going too.
"It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last
night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A
regular Moscow!"
were out of humor and dissatisfied with the affair, and so did not
exert themselves to cheer the men but merely carried out the
about an hour in the dense fog, the greater part of the men had to
halt and an unpleasant consciousness of some dislocation and blunder
spread through the ranks. How such a consciousness is communicated
surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly, and irrepressibly, as
allies, it might perhaps have been a long time before this
consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but as
it was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the
been occasioned by the sausage eaters.
"Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come up
against the French?"
"No, one can't hear them. They'd be firing if we had."
"They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand in
Germans' muddling! What stupid devils!"
"Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, they're crowding up
behind. And now here we stand hungry."
"I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blocking
said another.
"What division are you?" shouted an adjutant, riding up.
"The Eighteenth."
"Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now you
won't get there till evening."
"What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they are
doing!" said the officer and rode off.
"Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabbering no one can make out," said a
soldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them,
the scoundrels!"
The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry was
moving toward our left flank, the higher command found that our center
was too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all
At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a
Russian general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalry
should be halted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higher
dispirited. After an hour's delay they at last moved on, descending
the hill. The fog that was dispersing on the hill lay still more
densely below, where they were descending. In front in the fog a
intervals--trata... tat--and then more and more regularly and rapidly,
and the action at the Goldbach Stream began.
Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having
stumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from their
commanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading
through the ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in front
or around them in the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with the
from the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in
Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog;
It was nine o'clock in the morning. The fog lay unbroken like a
The whole French army, and even Napoleon himself with his staff,
were not on the far side of the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and
Schlappanitz beyond which we intended to take up our position and
that Napoleon with the naked eye could distinguish a mounted man
from one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak which he had worn on his
of his marshals. He gazed silently at the hills which seemed to rise
in the distance, and he listened to the sounds of firing in the
valley. Not a single muscle of his face--which in those days was still
predictions were being justified. Part of the Russian force had
already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes and
part were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack
in a hollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen, the Russian
columns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in one
night, by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from all
indications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far
away in front of them, and that the columns moving near Pratzen
constituted the center of the Russian army, and that that center was
he did not begin the engagement.
Before dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and
in good spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in
that happy mood in which everything seems possible and everything
the mist, and his cold face wore that special look of confident,
attention. He looked now at the Pratzen Heights, now at the sun
begin the action--he drew the glove from his shapely white hand,
made a sign with it to the marshals, and ordered the action to
begin. The marshals, accompanied by adjutants, galloped off in
different directions, and a few minutes later the chief forces of
the French army moved rapidly toward those Pratzen Heights which
were being more and more denuded by Russian troops moving down the
At eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth
column, Miloradovich's, the one that was to take the place of
Przebyszewski's and Langeron's columns which had already gone down
gave them the order to march, thereby indicating that he intended to
lead that column himself. When he had reached the village of Pratzen
he halted. Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense number
forming the commander in chief's suite. He was in a state of
man is at the approach of a long-awaited moment. He was firmly
convinced that this was the day of his Toulon, or his bridge of
would do so. The locality and the position of our troops were known to
him as far as they could be known to anyone in our army. His own
forgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother's plan, Prince Andrew
considered possible contingencies and formed new projects such as
might call for his rapidity of perception and decision.
To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseen
thought he, "I shall be sent with a brigade or division, and there,
standard in hand, I shall go forward and break whatever is in front of
Seeing them he kept thinking, "That may be the very standard with
which I shall lead the army."
In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights
into which our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of
firing. Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the right the
right the Guards were entering the misty region with a sound of
hoofs and wheels and now and then a gleam of bayonets; to the left
the troops pass by him. That morning Kutuzov seemed worn and
"Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the
village!" he said angrily to a general who had ridden up. "Don't you
through narrow village streets when we are marching against the
enemy?"
"I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency,"
answered the general.
Kutuzov laughed bitterly.
"You'll make a fine thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy!
Very fine!"
"My dear fellow," Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew, "the old man
is as surly as a dog."
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his
hat galloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had the
fourth column advanced into action.
fall upon Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutuzov's
what was being done was not his adjutant's fault, and still not
answering the Austrian adjutant, he addressed Bolkonski.
"Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passed
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.
"And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted," he added. "What
are they doing? What are they doing?" he murmured to himself, still
not replying to the Austrian.
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped
sharpshooters in front of our columns. The colonel at the head of
the regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief's order to
throw out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that there were
commander in chief's name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew
heavily in the saddle with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily
with closed eyes. The troops were no longer moving, but stood with the
butts of their muskets on the ground.
extended line of the advancing Russian columns. Evidently the person
regiment in front of which Kutuzov was standing began to shout, he
rode a little to one side and looked round with a frown. Along the
road from Pratzen galloped what looked like a squadron of horsemen
bobtailed chestnut horse, the other who was in a white uniform rode
a black one. These were the two Emperors followed by their suites.
Kutuzov, affecting the manners of an old soldier at the front, gave
the command "Attention!" and rode up to the Emperors with a salute.
the air of a subordinate who obeys without reasoning. With an
affectation of respect which evidently struck Alexander
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy
face of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and
vanished. After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than
on the field of Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first time
abroad, but there was still the same bewitching combination of majesty
and mildness in his fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the
At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic; here he seemed
brighter and more energetic. He was slightly flushed after galloping
round at the faces of his suite, young and animated as his own.
Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Prince Volkonsky, Strogonov, and the others,
stopped behind the Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long faced
young man, sat very erect on his handsome black horse, looking about
white adjutants and asked some question--"Most likely he is asking
acquaintance with a smile he could not repress as he recalled his
reception at Brunn. In the Emperors' suite were the picked young
orderly officers of the Guard and line regiments, Russian and
Austrian. Among them were grooms leading the Tsar's beautiful relay
horses covered with embroidered cloths.
As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields
galloping advent of all these brilliant young men.
"Why aren't you beginning, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the Emperor
Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, glancing courteously at the same
time at the Emperor Francis.
respectfully.
The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had
not quite heard.
"waiting.") "Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your Majesty."
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged his
rather round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him, as
if complaining of Kutuzov.
"You know, Michael Ilarionovich, we are not on the
Empress' Field where a parade does not begin till all the troops are
what he was saying. But the Emperor Francis continued to look about
"That is just why I do not begin, sire," said Kutuzov in a
being heard, and again something in his face twitched--"That is just
In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed
dissatisfaction and reproach. "Old though he may be, he should not, he
certainly should not, speak like that," their glances seemed to say.
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov's eye
with respectfully bowed head, seemed also to be waiting. The silence
lasted for about a minute.
his head and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning,
but submissive general.
He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich, the commander
of the column, gave him the order to advance.
The troops again began to move, and two battalions of the Novgorod
and one of the Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Miloradovich,
front and back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashing
"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite,
the gentlemen of the Tsar's suite by his poor French.
*"Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to do, Sire."
Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a
little behind the Emperor. The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's
voice, obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect
of battle, and by the sight of the gallant Apsherons, his comrades
that he forgot the sovereigns' presence. "Lads, it's not the first
village you've had to take," cried he.
"Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.
The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that had
carried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the
Empress' Field, not understanding the significance of the firing,
nor of the nearness of the Emperor Francis' black cob, nor of all that
was being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a
remark to him, pointing to the gallant Apsherons.
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column
were marching along both.
The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly
visible about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. Down
below, on the left, the firing became more distinct. Kutuzov had
stopped and was speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who
was a little behind looking at them, turned to an adjutant to ask
him for a field glass.
distance, but down the hill before him. "It's the French!"
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass,
trying to snatch it from one another. The expression on all their
"It's the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But
how is that?" said different voices.
more than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing, a
"Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come,"
that very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was
heard quite close at hand, and a voice of naive terror barely two
steps from Prince Andrew shouted, "Brothers! All's lost!" And at
this as if at a command, everyone began to run.
Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where
not to be carried back with it oneself. Bolkonski only tried not to
what was happening in front of him. Nesvitski with an angry face,
red and unlike himself, was shouting to Kutuzov that if he did not
remained in the same place and without answering drew out a
of his lower jaw.
"The wound is not here, it is there!" said Kutuzov, pressing the
soldiers. "Stop them!" he shouted, and at the same moment, probably
rode to the right.
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by
are you hindering us?" Another in the same place turned round and
Having by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of
men, Kutuzov, with his suite diminished by more than half, rode toward
crowd of fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutuzov, saw on
the slope of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was
still firing and Frenchmen running toward it. Higher up stood some
remained. They were all pale and exchanged looks in silence.
pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to
punish him for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regiment
and across Kutuzov's suite like a flock of little birds.
at him. After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his
leg; several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holding
the flag let it fall from his hands. It swayed and fell, but caught on
the muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firing
without orders.
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around....
"Bolkonski!" he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness of
disordered battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"
But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears of
run to the standard.
"Here it is!" thought he, seizing the staff of the standard and
hearing with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him.
battalion would follow him.
And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then
another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting "Hurrah!"
and overtook him. A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag
was immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,
dragging it by the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he saw
our artillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, having
abandoned their guns, were running toward him. He also saw French
him unceasingly and to right and left of him soldiers continually
groaned and dropped. But he did not look at them: he looked only at
what was going on in front of him--at the battery. He now saw
clearly the figure of a red-haired gunner with his shako knocked awry,
pulling one end of a mop while a French soldier tugged at the other.
faces of these two men, who evidently did not realize what they were
doing.
"Why doesn't the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed? Why
doesn't the Frenchman stab him? He will not get away before the
And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to
ended. It seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him
on the head with the full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt a little, but
the worst of it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his
seeing what he had been looking at.
"What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giving way," thought he, and
fell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle
of the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunner
saved. But he saw nothing. Above him there was now nothing but the
sky--the lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, with
gray clouds gliding slowly across it. "How quiet, peaceful, and
solemn; not at all as I ran," thought Prince Andrew--"not as we ran,
shouting and fighting, not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with
frightened and angry faces struggled for the mop: how differently do
those clouds glide across that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did
at last! Yes! All is vanity, all falsehood, except that infinite
CHAPTER XVII
On our right flank commanded by Bagration, at nine o'clock the
battle had not yet begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov's
from himself, Prince Bagration proposed to Dolgorukov to send to
inquire of the commander in chief. Bagration knew that as the distance
be able to get back before evening.
suite, and the boyish face Rostov, breathless with excitement and
chief, your excellency?" said Rostov, with his hand to his cap.
"You can give the message to His Majesty," said Dolgorukov,
hurriedly interrupting Bagration.
On being relieved from picket duty Rostov had managed to get a few
with elasticity of movement, faith in his good fortune, and
generally in that state of mind which makes everything seem
All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be
a general engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he
was orderly to the bravest general, and still more, he was going
with a message to Kutuzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself.
The morning was bright, he had a good horse under him, and his heart
was full of joy and happiness. On receiving the order he gave his
line of Bagration's troops, which had not yet advanced into action but
were standing motionless; then he came to the region occupied by
for battle; having passed Uvarov's cavalry he clearly heard the
and louder.
In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three musket
shots at irregular intervals as before, followed by one or two
cannon shots, but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of the
hill before Pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon
merged into a general roar.
another down the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling,
spreading, and mingling with one another. He could also, by the
gleam of bayonets visible through the smoke, make out moving masses of
going on, but strain his attention as he would he could not understand
or make out anything of what was happening: there in the smoke men
effect on him; on the contrary, they stimulated his energy and
"Go on! Go on! Give it them!" he mentally exclaimed at these sounds,
and farther into the region where the army was already in action.
"How it will be there I don't know, but all will be well!" thought
After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part
of the line (the Guards) was already in action.
"So much the better! I shall see it close," he thought.
galloping toward him. They were our Uhlans who with disordered ranks
"That is no business of mine," he thought. He had not ridden many
hundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole
width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white
way of these men, and he would have got clear had they continued at
the same speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some of
the horses were already galloping. Rostov heard the thud of their
hoofs and the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, their
figures, and even their faces, more and more distinctly. They were our
Horse Guards, advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming
to meet them.
The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their
horses. Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command:
"Charge!" shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to
full speed. Rostov, fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack
on the French, galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go,
angrily on seeing Rostov before him, with whom he would inevitably
these gigantic men and horses) had it not occurred to Rostov to
heavy black horse, sixteen hands high, shied, throwing back its
ears; but the pockmarked Guardsman drove his huge spurs in
their foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry with
enveloped everything.
disappeared in the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after
them or to go where he was sent. This was the brilliant charge of
the Horse Guards that amazed the French themselves. Rostov was
horrified to hear later that of all that mass of huge and handsome
men, of all those brilliant, rich youths, officers and cadets, who had
left after the charge.
"Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shall
When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them
officers.
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he
heard a voice calling him by name.
"Rostov!"
"I say, we've been in the front line! Our regiment attacked!" said
Rostov stopped.
"Have you?" he said. "Well, how did it go?"
Guards, having taken up their position and seeing troops before
cannon balls discharged by those troops that they were themselves in
without hearing Boris to the end spurred his horse.
"There he is!" said Boris, thinking Rostov had said "His
his helmet and Horse Guards' jacket, shouting something to a pale,
"But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the commander in chief or the
bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it) "and I remained at
the front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family--the
von Bergs--have been knights!"
He said something more, but Rostov did not wait to hear it and
rode away.
Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostov, to
the place where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard.
Suddenly he heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind
our troops, where he could never have expected the enemy to be.
Impossible!" And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself
reflected, "there is no riding round it now. I must look for the
and more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the
village of Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.
soldiers running in confused crowds across his path.
"Kill the Germans!" shouted one.
"May the devil take them--the traitors!"
*"Hang these Russians!"
screams, and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing
died down. Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had
been firing at one another.
moment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only a
handful of scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can't be that, it
can't be! Only to get past them quicker, quicker!"
The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostov's head.
Though he saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights
just where he had been ordered to look for the commander in chief,
he could not, did not wish to, believe that.
village of Pratzen. But neither they nor a single commanding officer
were there, only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. He
the farther he went the more disorganized they were. The highroad on
which he had come out was thronged with caleches, carriages of all
sorts, and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, some wounded and
some not. This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under the
dismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French batteries
stationed on the Pratzen Heights.
"Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept asking
"Eh, brother! They've all bolted long ago!" said the soldier,
laughing for some reason and shaking himself free.
horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to
carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and
that he was dangerously wounded.
"It can't be!" said Rostov. "It must have been someone else."
"I saw him myself." replied the man with a self-confident smile of
seen him in Petersburg. I saw him just as I see you.... There he sat
in the carriage as pale as anything. How they made the four black
Imperial horses and Ilya Ivanych. I don't think Ilya drives anyone
except the Tsar!"
"Who is it you want?" he asked. "The commander in chief? He was
"Not killed--wounded!" another officer corrected him.
"Who? Kutuzov?" asked Rostov.
"Not Kutuzov, but what's his name--well, never mind... there are not
many left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commanders
and he walked on.
going. The Emperor was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible
to doubt it now. Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him, in
which he saw turrets and a church. What need to hurry? What was he now
to say to the Tsar or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive and
unwounded?
"Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!" a
soldier shouted to him. "They'd kill you there!"
"Oh, what are you talking about?" said another. "Where is he to
Rostov considered, and then went in the direction where they said he
save myself?" he thought. He rode on to the region where the
French had not yet occupied that region, and the Russians--the
field, like heaps of manure on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to
together in twos and threes and one could hear their distressing
screams and groans, sometimes feigned--or so it seemed to Rostov. He
he felt afraid--afraid not for his life, but for the courage he needed
and which he knew would not stand the sight of these unfortunates.
The French, who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead and
wounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an
shots. The sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the
terror and pity for himself. He remembered his mother's last letter.
"What would she feel," thought he, "if she saw me here now on this
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from
disordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry
fire sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the
battle was lost. No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where the
wounded was correct, others that it was not, and explained the false
really galloped from the field of battle with the pale and terrified
Ober-Hofmarschal Count Tolstoy, who had ridden out to the
to the left, and thither Rostov rode, not hoping to find anyone but
merely to ease his conscience. When he had ridden about two miles
and had passed the last of the Russian troops, he saw, near a
kitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men on horseback facing
Rostov; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which Rostov
little earth crumbled from the bank under the horse's hind hoofs.
Turning the horse sharply, he again jumped the ditch, and
deferentially addressed the horseman with the white plumes,
attention, made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and by
that gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented and adored
thought Rostov. At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov
saw the beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory.
charm, the mildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostov was
happy in the assurance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded
were false. He was happy to be seeing him. He knew that he might and
even ought to go straight to him and give the message Dolgorukov had
ordered him to deliver.
But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter
he is alone with her, so Rostov, now that he had attained what he
how to approach the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him
"What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of
Emperor that he had composed in his imagination could he now recall.
him for heroic deeds, and while dying he expressed the love his
actions had proved.
"Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the
right flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost?
reflections. Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkind
with a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back at
the Tsar, who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.
Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing the
Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke
long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping,
covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll's hand.
"And I might have been in his place!" thought Rostov, and hardly
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness
sovereign. It was a unique chance to show his devotion to the
Emperor and he had not made use of it.... "What have I done?"
thought he. And he turned round and galloped back to the place where
he had seen the Emperor, but there was no one beyond the ditch now.
vehicles were going to. Rostov followed them. In front of him walked
Kutuzov's groom leading horses in horsecloths. Then came a cart, and
behind that walked an old, bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked
"Tit! I say, Tit!" said the groom.
"What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly.
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points.
Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms. Other
columns after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly
The remains of Langeron's and Dokhturov's mingled forces were
crowding around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of
After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot
cannonade (delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from
numerous batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights,
directed at our retreating forces.
In the rearguard, Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept
years the old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap
peacefully angling, while his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled
that dam over which for so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and
wheat and had returned dusty with flour whitening their carts--on that
narrow dam amid the wagons and the cannon, under the horses' hoofs and
themselves in the same way.
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around,
or a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some and
splashing with blood those near them.
Dolokhov--now an officer--wounded in the arm, and on foot, with
represented all that was left of that whole regiment. Impelled by
the crowd, they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and,
squeezed together, moved a few steps, and again stopped.
another two minutes and it is certain death," thought each one.
Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the
under him; "turn this way!" he shouted to those with the gun. "It
bears!..."
The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that it
would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon
the bank, hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback at
that everyone ducked. It flopped into something moist, and the general
thought of raising him.
"Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don't you hear? Go
on!" innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the
the ice. Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen
pond. The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg
his waist. The nearest soldiers shrank back, the gun driver stopped
his horse, but from behind still came the shouts: "Onto the ice, why
horses to make them turn and move on. The horses moved off the bank.
The ice, that had held under those on foot, collapsed in a great mass,
and some forty men who were on it dashed, some forward and some
back, drowning one another.
onto the ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd
that covered the dam, the pond, and the bank.
his hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and
unconsciously uttering a gentle, piteous, and childlike moan.
not know how long his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again felt
head.
"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw
either," he thought. "Yes, I did not know anything, anything at all
till now. But where am I?"
lofty sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher,
ridden up and stopped near him.
wounded left on the field.
"Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian
grenadier, who, with his face buried in the ground and a blackened
nape, lay on his stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
"The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted, Your
firing at Augesd.
"Have some brought from the reserve," said Napoleon, and having gone
with the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. (The flag had
"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski.
Napoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he
heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Not
only did they not interest him, but he took no notice of them and at
knew it was Napoleon--his hero--but at that moment Napoleon seemed
to him such a small, insignificant creature compared with what was
passing now between himself and that lofty infinite sky with the
clouds flying over it. At that moment it meant nothing to him who
might be standing over him, or what was said of him; he was only
glad that people were standing near him and only wished that they
beautiful now that he had today learned to understand it so
differently. He collected all his strength, to stir and utter a sound.
his own pity.
"Ah! He is alive," said Napoleon. "Lift this young man up and
carry him to the dressing station."
Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who,
victory.
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from
while being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressing
station. He did not regain consciousness till late in the day, when
with other wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the
hospital. During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a
French convoy officer, who said rapidly: "We must halt here: the
Alexander's Guards," said the first one, indicating a Russian
society. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer of
the Horse Guards.
"Which is the senior?" he asked, on seeing the prisoners.
They named the colonel, Prince Repnin.
"You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander's regiment of
Horse Guards?" asked Napoleon.
"I commanded a squadron," replied Repnin.
"Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon.
"The praise of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward,"
"He's very young to come to meddle with us."
"Youth is no hindrance to courage," muttered Sukhtelen in a
failing voice.
attract his attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on
man" that was connected in his memory with Prince Andrew.
"Well, and you, young man," said he. "How do you feel, mon brave?"
Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few
words to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed
straight on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at that
mean did his hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory
had seen and understood, that he could not answer him.
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the
stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood,
Napoleon's eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of
The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to
wounds. Au revoir, Prince Repnin!" and he spurred his horse and
His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.
but seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now
hastened to return the holy image.
little icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his
chest outside his uniform.
"It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon
"it would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems
to Mary. How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this
life, and what to expect after it beyond the grave! How happy and calm
I should be if I could now say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!'... But to
whom should I say that? Either to a Power indefinable,
incomprehensible, which I not only cannot address but which I cannot
even express in words--the Great All or Nothing-" said he to
himself, "or to that God who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary!
incomprehensible but all-important."
father, wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felt
the night before the battle, the figure of the insignificant little
Napoleon, and above all this the lofty sky, formed the chief
The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented
itself to him. He was already enjoying that happiness when that little
Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of
shortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts and
torments had followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Toward
morning all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness
doctor, Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in
convalescence.
"He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larrey, "and will not
recover."
And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care
of the inhabitants of the district.
BOOK FOUR: 1806
CHAPTER I
comrade at the last post station but one before Moscow, Denisov had
across the snow-covered road, did not once wake up on the way to
"How much longer? How much longer? Oh, these insufferable streets,
shops, bakers' signboards, street lamps, and sleighs!" thought Rostov,
when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and they had
entered Moscow.
of the sleigh.
"There's the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhar, has
hurry up? Now then!"
"Which house is it?" asked the driver.
"Dmitri," said Rostov to his valet on the box, "those lights are
in our house, aren't they?"
new mustache. "Now then, get on," he shouted to the driver. "Do wake
the sleigh bore to the right, drew up at an entrance, and Rostov saw
overhead the old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster broken off,
the porch, and the post by the side of the pavement. He sprang out
before the sleigh stopped, and ran into the hall. The house stood cold
for a moment with a sinking heart, and then immediately starting to
staircase. The well-known old door handle, which always angered the
countess when it was not properly cleaned, turned as loosely as
ever. A solitary tallow candle burned in the anteroom.
Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokofy, the footman, who was
so strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, sat
opening door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly
changed to one of delighted amazement.
"Gracious heavens! The young count!" he cried, recognizing his young
master. "Can it be? My treasure!" and Prokofy, trembling with
to announce him, but, changing his mind, came back and stooped to kiss
"All well?" asked Rostov, drawing away his arm.
"Is everything quite all right?"
"The Lord be thanked, yes!"
to forestall him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the
already seen the young master, and, before he had reached the
began hugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of the
same kind sprang from a second door and a third; more hugging, more
which was Papa, which Natasha, and which Petya. Everyone shouted,
talked, and kissed him at the same time. Only his mother was not
there, he noticed that.
"And I did not know... Nicholas... My darling!..."
changed!... Where are the candles?... Tea!..."
*Nicholas.
"And me, kiss me!"
"Dearest... and me!"
Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhaylovna, Vera, and the old count
were all hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the
room, exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.
Natasha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his
face with kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang
away and pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked
piercingly.
All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy, and all
around were lips seeking a kiss.
Sonya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, radiant with bliss,
looked eagerly toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which she
taking her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath. He gave
Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, made
since he had left. All the others let him go, and he ran to her.
When they met, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She could not lift her
Denisov, who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there
The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of
Denisov.
"Darling Denisov!" screamed Natasha, beside herself with rapture,
and, taking Natasha's hand, kissed it.
The old countess, not letting go of his hand and kissing it every
moment, sat beside him: the rest, crowding round him, watched every
nearest to him and disputed with one another who should bring him
his tea, handkerchief, and pipe.
Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first
slept till ten o'clock.
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,
cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. The
of tobacco.
"Hallo, Gwiska--my pipe!" came Vasili Denisov's husky voice.
Rostov, rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together, raised his
rustle of starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of
girls' voices came from the adjoining room. The door was opened a
crack and there was a glimpse of something blue, of ribbons, black
hair, and merry faces. It was Natasha, Sonya, and Petya, who had
come to see whether they were getting up.
Meanwhile, Petya, having found and seized the sabers in the outer
men undressed, opened the bedroom door.
having let Petya in, closed again. A sound of laughter came from
"Nicholas! Come out in your dressing gown!" said Natasha's voice.
"Is this your saber?" asked Petya. "Or is it yours?" he said,
Rostov hurriedly put something on his feet, drew on his dressing
gown, and went out. Natasha had put on one spurred boot and was just
getting her foot into the other. Sonya, when he came in, was
were both fresh, rosy, and bright. Sonya ran away, but Natasha, taking
talking. They hardly gave one another time to ask questions and give
interest anyone but themselves. Natasha laughed at every word he
said or that she said herself, not because what they were saying was
amusing, but because she felt happy and was unable to control her
joy which expressed itself by laughter.
Rostov felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, that
brightened his soul and his face.
"No, but listen," she said, "now you are quite a man, aren't you?
I'm awfully glad you're my brother." She touched his mustache. "I want
"Why did Sonya run away?" asked Rostov.
"Ah, yes! That's a whole long story! How are you going to speak to
her--thou or you?"
"No, call her you, please! I'll tell you all about it some other
Such a friend that I burned my arm for her sake. Look here!"
She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her
covered even by a ball dress.
"I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a ruler in
the fire and pressed it there!"
which had no meaning for anyone else, but gave him some of the best
"We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was just
nonsense, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does
it for life, but I don't understand that, I forget quickly."
"Well, what then?"
"Well, she loves me and you like that."
Natasha suddenly flushed.
to forget all that.... She says: 'I shall love him always, but let him
asked Natasha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that
"No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I have already talked it over.
We knew you'd say so. But it won't do, because you see, if you say
that--if you consider yourself bound by your promise--it will seem
as if she had not meant it seriously. It makes it as if you were
marrying her because you must, and that wouldn't do at all."
Rostov saw that it had been well considered by them. Sonya had
was a charming girl of sixteen, evidently passionately in love with
him (he did not doubt that for an instant). Why should he not love her
now, and even marry her, Rostov thought, but just now there were so
many other pleasures and interests before him! "Yes, they have taken a
"Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he continued.
"Oh, what nonsense!" cried Natasha, laughing. "I don't think about
"Now?" repeated Natasha, and a happy smile lit up her face. "Have
"Not seen Duport--the famous dancer? Well then, you won't
understand. That's what I'm up to."
Curving her arms, Natasha held out her skirts as dancers do, ran
together, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes.
"See, I'm standing! See!" she said, but could not maintain herself
"No, but don't you think it's nice?" she kept repeating.
"Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry Boris?"
Natasha flared up. "I don't want to marry anyone. And I'll tell
"But that's all rubbish," Natasha chattered on. "And is Denisov
"Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he very terrible,
"Why terrible?" asked Nicholas. "No, Vaska is a splendid fellow."
"You call him Vaska? That's funny! And is he very nice?"
"Very."
dancer, but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile. When
to behave with her. The evening before, in the first happy moment of
meeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could
was looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave
with her. He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as you-
kisses. Her looks asked him to forgive her for having dared, by
Natasha's intermediacy, to remind him of his promise, and then thanked
him for his love. His looks thanked her for offering him his freedom
"How strange it is," said Vera, selecting a moment when all were
silent, "that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet
like strangers."
most of her observations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not
only Sonya, Nicholas, and Natasha, but even the old countess, who-
dreading this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making a
brilliant match--blushed like a girl.
Denisov, to Rostov's surprise, appeared in the drawing room with
On his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostov was
welcomed by his home circle as the best of sons, a hero, and their
polite young man; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of
hussars, a good dancer, and one of the best matches in the city.
that year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas,
acquiring a trotter of his own, very stylish riding breeches of the
latest cut, such as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of the
latest fashion, with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs,
passed his time very gaily. After a short period of adapting himself
to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be
at home again. He felt that he had grown up and matured very much. His
despair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing money
from Gavril to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sonya on the sly--he
now recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.
Now he was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, and
wearing the Cross of St. George, awarded to soldiers for bravery in
action, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respected
racing men was training a trotter of his own for a race. He knew a
lady on one of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. He led
the mazurka at the Arkharovs' ball, talked about the war with Field
Marshal Kamenski, visited the English Club, and was on intimate
terms with a colonel of forty to whom Denisov had introduced him.
His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. But
he often spoke about him and about his love for him, letting it be
understood that he had not told all and that there was something in
his whole soul he shared the adoration then common in Moscow for the
During Rostov's short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army,
he did not draw closer to Sonya, but rather drifted away from her. She
but he was at the period of youth when there seems so much to do
that there is no time for that sort of thing and a young man fears
other things. When he thought of Sonya, during this stay in Moscow, he
it seemed to him that the society of women was rather derogatory to
matter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar!
arranging a dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club.
The count walked up and down the hall in his dressing gown, giving
orders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktist, the Club's head
the Club from the day it was founded. To him the Club entrusted the
arrangement of the festival in honor of Bagration, for few men knew so
still fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out of
their own resources what might be needed for the success of the
with pleased faces, for they knew that under no other management could
costing several thousand rubles.
"Well then, mind and have cocks' comb in the turtle soup, you know!"
"Shall we have three cold dishes then?" asked the cook.
The count considered.
"We can't have less--yes, three... the mayonnaise, that's one," said
he, bending down a finger.
"Then am I to order those large sterlets?" asked the steward.
"Yes, it can't be helped if they won't take less. Ah, dear me! I was
clutched at his head. "Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmitri! Eh,
Dmitri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum
set the serfs to work. Say that everything out of the hothouses must
importance, he returned again, called back the cook and the club
clinking of spurs were heard at the door, and the young count,
handsome, rosy, with a dark little mustache, evidently rested and made
sleeker by his easy life in Moscow, entered the room.
as if he felt a little confused before his son. "Now, if you would
only help a bit! I must have singers too. I shall have my own
orchestra, but shouldn't we get the gypsy singers as well? You
military men like that sort of thing."
before the battle of Schon Grabern than you do now," said his son with
a smile.
The old count pretended to be angry.
And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and
respectful expression, looked observantly and sympathetically at the
father and son.
he. "Laughing at us old fellows!"
"That's so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a good
dinner, but providing it and serving it all up, that's not their
"That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing his
pair at once, and go to Bezukhob's, and tell him 'Count Ilya has
sent you to ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.' We can't get
them from anyone else. He's not there himself, so you'll have to go in
and ask the princesses; and from there go on to the Rasgulyay--the
coachman Ipatka knows--and look up the gypsy Ilyushka, the one who
"And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him?" asked
At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with the
businesslike, preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which never
confused and begged her to excuse his costume.
The count was delighted at Anna Mikhaylovna's taking upon herself
one of his commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her.
Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was
"Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," she said. "If what
as young Bezukhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try to
give him what consolation I can."
Anna Mikhaylovna sighed deeply.
him to his house in Petersburg, and now... she has come here and
that daredevil after her!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, wishing to show
smile betraying her sympathy for the "daredevil," as she called
"Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the Club--it will all
blow over. It will be a tremendous banquet."
and fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaiting
the guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Prince
On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow
had been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to
victories that on receiving news of the defeat some would simply not
believe it, while others sought some extraordinary explanation of so
strange an event. In the English Club, where all who were
men who set the tone in conversation--Count Rostopchin, Prince Yuri
Dolgorukov, Valuev, Count Markov, and Prince Vyazemski--did not show
themselves at the Club, but met in private houses in intimate circles,
among them--remained for a while without any definite opinion on the
subject of the war and without leaders. The Moscovites felt that
something was wrong and that to discuss the bad news was difficult,
and so it was best to be silent. But after a while, just as a jury
reappeared, and everybody began speaking clearly and definitely.
of Moscow the same things began to be said. These reasons were the
the Pole Przebyszewski and of the Frenchman Langeron, Kutuzov's
army, the Russian army, everyone declared, was extraordinary and had
heroes. But the hero of heroes was Prince Bagration, distinguished
where he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and had all day
conduced to Bagration's being selected as Moscow's hero was the fact
his person, honor was shown to a simple fighting Russian soldier
without connections and intrigues, and to one who was associated by
memories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suvorov. Moreover,
disapproval and dislike of Kutuzov.
Kutuzov no one spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers,
modeling and modeling you must get smeared with clay," suggesting
the words of Rostopchin, that French soldiers have to be incited to
battle by highfalutin words, and Germans by logical arguments to
show them that it is more dangerous to run away than to advance, but
that Russian soldiers only need to be restrained and held back! On all
sides, new and fresh anecdotes were heard of individual examples of
heroism shown by our officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a
standard, another had killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five
cannon singlehanded. Berg was mentioned, by those who did not know
him, as having, when wounded in the right hand, taken his sword in the
left, and gone forward. Of Bolkonski, nothing was said, and only those
who knew him intimately regretted that he had died so young, leaving a
On that third of March, all the rooms in the English Club were
springtime. The members and guests of the Club wandered hither and
Russian kaftans. Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes and
smart stockings, stood at every door anxiously noting visitors'
every movement in order to offer their services. Most of those present
fingers, and resolute gestures and voices. This class of guests and
groups. A minority of those present were casual guests--chiefly
young men, among whom were Denisov, Rostov, and Dolokhov--who was
now again an officer in the Semenov regiment. The faces of these young
condescending respect for their elders which seems to say to the older
generation, "We are prepared to respect and honor you, but all the
same remember that the future belongs to us."
wife's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles,
Here, as elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience
to his wealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people,
he treated them with absent-minded contempt.
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by his
wealth and connections he belonged to the groups old and honored
approached respectfully to hear the voices of well-known men. The
overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to force their way through
Valuev was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent from
Austrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in reply
close by, tried to make a joke, saying that Kutuzov had evidently
failed to learn from Suvorov even so simple a thing as the art of
wit, making him feel that in that place and on that day, it was
improper to speak so of Kutuzov.
boots between the dining and drawing rooms, hastily greeting the
important and unimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were all
stood at a window with Dolokhov, whose acquaintance he had lately made
and highly valued. The old count came up to them and pressed
Dolokhov's hand.
"Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... been
together out there... both playing the hero... Ah, Vasili
general stir, and a footman who had run in announced, with a
frightened face: "He's arrived!"
Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, and--like rye shaken
different rooms came together and crowded in the large drawing room by
the door of the ballroom.
sword, which, in accord with the Club custom, he had given up to the
hall porter. He had no lambskin cap on his head, nor had he a loaded
whip over his shoulder, as when Rostov had seen him on the eve of
the battle of Austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with Russian
Evidently just before coming to the dinner he had had his hair and
was something naively festive in his air, which, in conjunction with
his firm and virile features, gave him a rather comical expression.
doorway to allow him, as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagration
was embarrassed, not wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and
this caused some delay at the doors, but after all he did at last
enter first. He walked shyly and awkwardly over the parquet floor of
the reception room, not knowing what to do with his hands; he was more
accustomed to walk over a plowed field under fire, as he had done at
expressing their delight at seeing such a highly honored guest, took
possession of him as it were, without waiting for his reply,
impossible to enter the drawing-room door for the crowd of members and
guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look at Bagration
over each other's shoulders, as if he were some rare animal. Count
Make way, make way!" pushed through the crowd more energetically
on the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members of the
Club, beset the new arrivals. Count Ilya, again thrusting his way
minute later with another committeeman, carrying a large silver salver
which he presented to Prince Bagration. On the salver lay some
verses composed and printed in the hero's honor. Bagration, on
seeing the salver, glanced around in dismay, as though seeking help.
their power, he resolutely took the salver with both hands and
would, it seemed, have held it till evening and have gone in to dinner
"Well, I will read them, then!" Bagration seemed to say, and, fixing
his weary eyes on the paper, began to read them with a fixed and
serious expression. But the author himself took the verses and began
reading them aloud. Bagration bowed his bead and listened:
   And on the throne our Titus shield.
   A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man,
   A Rhipheus at home, a Caesar in the field!
   E'en fortunate Napoleon
   Knows by experience, now, Bagration,
But before he had finished reading, a stentorian major-domo
dining room came the resounding strains of the polonaise:
   Conquest's joyful thunder waken,
and Count Rostov, glancing angrily at the author who went on reading
his verses, bowed to Bagration. Everyone rose, feeling that dinner was
more important than verses, and Bagration, again preceding all the
rest, went in to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor between
two Alexanders--Bekleshev and Naryshkin--which was a significant
allusion to the name of the sovereign. Three hundred persons took
importance: the more important nearer to the honored guest, as
naturally as water flows deepest where the land lies lowest.
Just before dinner, Count Ilya Rostov presented his son to
Bagration, who recognized him and said a few words to him,
Count Ilya looked joyfully and proudly around while Bagration spoke to
his son.
Nicholas Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov,
beside Prince Nesvitski. Count Ilya Rostov with the other members of
His efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, both the Lenten and
the end of the meal. He winked at the butler, whispered directions
pleasure), the footmen began popping corks and filling the champagne
glasses. After the fish, which made a certain sensation, the count
the same moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and
enthusiasm. The band immediately struck up "Conquest's joyful
thunder waken..." All rose and cried "Hurrah!" Bagration also rose and
shouted "Hurrah!" in exactly the same voice in which he had shouted it
on the field at Schon Grabern. Young Rostov's ecstatic voice could
be heard above the three hundred others. He nearly wept. "To the
health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!" he roared, "Hurrah!" and
emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to the floor. Many
followed his example, and the loud shouting continued for a long time.
When the voices subsided, the footmen cleared away the broken glass
and everybody sat down again, smiling at the noise they had made and
exchanging remarks. The old count rose once more, glanced at a note
lying beside his plate, and proposed a toast, "To the health of the
hero of our last campaign, Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration!" and
voices again, but instead of the band a choir began singing a
cantata composed by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov:
   Russians! O'er all barriers on!
   Courage conquest guarantees;
   He brings foe men to their knees,... etc.
As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast was
glass was smashed, and the shouting grew louder. They drank to
Bekleshev, Naryshkin, Uvarov, Dolgorukov, Apraksin, Valuev, to the
finally to Count Ilya Rostov separately, as the organizer of the
CHAPTER IV
Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov. As usual, he ate
and drank much, and eagerly. But those who knew him intimately noticed
through dinner and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, with fixed
eyes and a look of complete absent-mindedness, kept rubbing the bridge
hear nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by
some depressing and unsolved problem.
The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given by
the princess, his cousin, at Moscow, concerning Dolokhov's intimacy
with his wife, and by an anonymous letter he had received that
morning, which in the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters
said that he saw badly through his spectacles, but that his wife's
time he chanced to meet Dolokhov's handsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt
Dolokhov, Pierre saw clearly that what was said in the letter might be
wife. He involuntarily remembered how Dolokhov, who had fully
recovered his former position after the campaign, had returned to
with Pierre as a boon companion, Dolokhov had come straight to his
their house, and how cynically Dolokhov had praised his wife's
them for a day.
to the pleasure of deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if it
were true, but I do not believe it. I have no right to, and can't,
dropping them into the water, or when he challenged a man to a duel
without any reason, or shot a post-boy's horse with a pistol. That
expression was often on Dolokhov's face when looking at him. "Yes,
he is a bully," thought Pierre, "to kill a man means nothing to him.
It must seem to him that everyone is afraid of him, and that must
please him. He must think that I, too, am afraid of him--and in fact I
and monstrous rising in his soul. Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov were
merrily to his two friends, one of whom was a dashing hussar and the
other a notorious duelist and rake, and every now and then he
glanced ironically at Pierre, whose preoccupied, absent-minded, and
massive figure was a very noticeable one at the dinner. Rostov
looked inimically at Pierre, first because Pierre appeared to his
hussar eyes as a rich civilian, the husband of a beauty, and in a
responded to his greeting. When the Emperor's health was drunk,
health?"
till all were seated again, turned with his kindly smile to Rostov.
"Why, I didn't recognize you!" he said. But Rostov was otherwise
"Why don't you renew the acquaintance?" said Dolokhov to Rostov.
"Confound him, he's a fool!" said Rostov.
"One should make up to the husbands of pretty women," said Denisov.
talking about him. He reddened and turned away.
"Well, now to the health of handsome women!" said Dolokhov, and with
mouth, he turned with his glass to Pierre.
lovers!" he added.
Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without looking
leaning across, snatched it from his hand and began reading it. Pierre
looked at Dolokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible and
monstrous that had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took
possession of him. He leaned his whole massive body across the table.
"How dare you take it?" he shouted.
Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nesvitski
and the neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov.
"Don't! Don't! What are you about?" whispered their frightened
smile of his which seemed to say, "Ah! This is what I like!"
"You shan't have it!" he said distinctly.
Pale, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the copy.
"You...! you... scoundrel! I challenge you!" he ejaculated, and,
pushing back his chair, he rose from the table.
At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felt
that the question of his wife's guilt which had been tormenting him
He hated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Denisov's
be Dolokhov's second, and after dinner he discussed the arrangements
"Well then, till tomorrow at Sokolniki," said Dolokhov, as he took
Dolokhov paused.
killed, you are a fool and are lost for certain. But go with the
firm intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as
*Till tomorrow, my dear fellow.
Next day, at eight in the morning, Pierre and Nesvitski drove to the
there. Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations
was yellow. He had evidently not slept that night. He looked about
distractedly and screwed up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun. He
was entirely absorbed by two considerations: his wife's guilt, of
the guiltlessness of Dolokhov, who had no reason to preserve the honor
of a man who was nothing to him.... "I should perhaps have done the
should have done the same, then why this duel, this murder? Either I
him, he would ask in a particularly calm and absent-minded way,
which inspired the respect of the onlookers, "Will it be long? Are
things ready?"
I did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no sufficient
concerned in the affair, and like everyone in similar cases, did not
yet believe that the affair had come to an actual duel). "You know,
Count, it is much more honorable to admit one's mistake than to let
matters become irreparable. There was no insult on either side.
Allow me to convey...."
same.... Is everything ready?" he added. "Only tell me where to go and
where to shoot," he said with an unnaturally gentle smile.
the trigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand--a fact
that he did not to confess.
"Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot," said he.
"No apologies, none whatever," said Dolokhov to Denisov (who on
the appointed place.
The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road,
during the last few days. The antagonists stood forty paces apart at
the farther edge of the clearing. The seconds, measuring the paces,
intothe ground ten paces apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing and
misty; at forty paces' distance nothing could be seen. For three
minutes all had been ready, but they still delayed and all were
silent.
CHAPTER V
"All right," said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling
begun could no longer be averted but was taking its course
independently of men's will.
and at the word thwee begin to advance.
The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks, nearer and
mist. They had the right to fire when they liked as they approached
the barrier. Dolokhov walked slowly without raising his pistol,
antagonist's face. His mouth wore its usual semblance of a smile.
apparently afraid of shooting himself with it. His left hand he held
carefully back, because he wished to support his right hand with it
and knew he must not do so. Having advanced six paces and strayed
shown, fired. Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre
from seeing anything for an instant, but there was no second report as
he had expected. He only heard Dolokhov's hurried steps, and his
figure came in view through the smoke. He was pressing one hand to his
was pale. Rostov ran toward him and said something.
"No-o-o!" muttered Dolokhov through his teeth, "no, it's not
over." And after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the
wiped it on his coat and supported himself with it. His frowning
"Plea..." began Dolokhov, but could not at first pronounce the word.
"Please," he uttered with an effort.
Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began running toward Dolokhov
"To your barrier!" and Pierre, grasping what was meant, stopped by
his saber. Only ten paces divided them. Dolokhov lowered his head to
the snow, greedily bit at it, again raised his head, adjusted himself,
drew in his legs and sat up, seeking a firm center of gravity. He
sucked and swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but
Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and legs
helplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facing
Dolokhov looked sorrowfully at him. Denisov, Rostov, and Nesvitski
closed their eyes. At the same instant they heard a report and
Dolokhov's angry cry.
the snow.
Pierre clutched his temples, and turning round went into the forest,
"Folly... folly! Death... lies..." he repeated, puckering his face.
Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov.
answer a word to the questions addressed to him. But on entering
Moscow he suddenly came to and, lifting his head with an effort,
took Rostov, who was sitting beside him, by the hand. Rostov was
struck by the totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender
voice. "Where are we? In Moscow, I know. I don't matter, but I have
"Who?" asked Rostov.
"My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother," and
Dolokhov pressed Rostov's hand and burst into tears.
Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked, and to his great surprise
learned that Dolokhov the brawler, Dolokhov the bully, lived in Moscow
with an old mother and a hunchback sister, and was the most
CHAPTER VI
and in Moscow their house was always full of visitors. The night after
the duel he did not go to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained
in his father's room, that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died.
He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that
had happened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm of feelings,
thoughts, and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not
days of their marriage, with bare shoulders and a languid,
passionate look on her face, and then immediately he saw beside her
Dolokhov's handsome, insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had seen
it at the banquet, and then that same face pale, quivering, and
suffering, as it had been when he reeled and sank on the snow.
to do it?"--"Because you married her," answered an inner voice.
"But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In marrying her without
he had found so difficult to utter: "I love you." "It all comes from
so, that I had no right to do it. And so it turns out."
He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection.
Particularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollection
of how one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom into
head steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and
at his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing
"But how often I have felt proud of her, proud of her majestic
beauty. So this is what I was proud of! I then thought that I did
not understand her. How often when considering her character I have
told myself that I was to blame for not understanding her, for not
understanding that constant composure and complacency and lack of
"Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss
her naked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but let herself
be kissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy, and she
replied with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous:
contemptuously and said she was not a fool to want to have children,
and that she was not going to have any children by me."
Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and
the vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, though
"I'm not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vous
promener,"* she used to say. Often seeing the success she had with
love her.
"Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself; "I knew she was a
depraved woman," he repeated, "but dared not admit it to myself. And
now there's Dolokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and
perhaps dying, while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!"
Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of
what is called weak character, do not seek a confidant in their
troubles. He digested his sufferings alone.
"It is all, all her fault," he said to himself; "but what of that?
which was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty and must
apart from myself.
*I love you.
a criminal," came into Pierre's head, "and from their point of view
they were right, as were those too who canonized him and died a
martyr's death for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a
despot. Who is right and who is wrong? No one! But if you are alive-
live: tomorrow you'll die as I might have died an hour ago. And is
it worth tormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life in
comparison with eternity?"
reflections, she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments
when he had most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he
felt the blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move
about and break and tear whatever came to his hand. "Why did I tell
her that 'Je vous aime'?" he kept repeating to himself. And when he
laugh at himself.
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to
Petersburg. He could not imagine how he could speak to her now. He
resolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his
intention to part from her forever.
Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee,
He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled
"The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at
home," said the valet.
countess herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with
silver and with simply dressed hair (two immense plaits twice round
except that there was a wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent
marble brow. With her imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in
it. She waited till the valet had set down the coffee things and
left the room. Pierre looked at her timidly over his spectacles, and
continues to crouch motionless before her enemies, he tried to
continue reading. But feeling this to be senseless and impossible,
he again glanced timidly at her. She did not sit down but looked at
"Well, what's this now? What have you been up to now, I should
"I? What have I...?" stammered Pierre.
"So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel
about? What is it meant to prove? What? I ask you."
but could not reply.
"If you won't answer, I'll tell you..." Helene went on. "You believe
Dolokhov was my lover," she said in French with her coarse plainness
prove? That you're a fool, que vous etes un sot, but everybody knew
that. What will be the result? That I shall be the laughingstock of
all Moscow, that everyone will say that you, drunk and not knowing
"And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like
"Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell you
plainly that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who
would not have taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so,"
Pierre wished to say something, looked at her with eyes whose
strange expression she did not understand, and lay down again. He
was suffering physically at that moment, there was a weight on his
chest and he could not breathe. He knew that he must do something to
put an end to this suffering, but what he wanted to do was too
terrible.
with a strength he had never before felt, he made a step toward her
father's nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and
delight of frenzy. He flung down the slab, broke it, and swooping down
terrible voice that the whole house heard it with horror. God knows
what he would have done at that moment had Helene not fled from the
room.
estates in Great Russia, which formed the larger part of his property,
CHAPTER VII
Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz
and the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite
possibility of his having been picked up on the battlefield by the
people of the place and that he might now be lying, recovering or
gazettes from which the old prince first heard of the defeat at
Austerlitz stated, as usual very briefly and vaguely, that after
brilliant engagements the Russians had had to retreat and had made
their withdrawal in perfect order. The old prince understood from this
official report that our army had been defeated. A week after the
Kutuzov informing the prince of the fate that had befallen his son.
"Your son," wrote Kutuzov, "fell before my eyes, a standard in his
hand and at the head of a regiment--he fell as a hero, worthy of his
father and his fatherland. To the great regret of myself and of the
whole army it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not. I comfort
After receiving this news late in the evening, when he was alone
morning, but he was silent with his steward, the gardener, and the
architect, and though he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.
When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at
She approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her.
not crushed, but angry and working unnaturally, she saw that hanging
incomprehensible--the death of one she loved.
"Father! Andrew!"--said the ungraceful, awkward princess with such
father could not bear her look but turned away with a sob.
"Bad news! He's not among the prisoners nor among the killed!
Kutuzov writes..." and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to
The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, but
on hearing these words her face changed and something brightened in
from the joys and sorrows of this world--overflowed the great grief
within her. She forgot all fear of her father, went up to him, took
"Father," she said, "do not turn away from me, let us weep together."
"Scoundrels! Blackguards!" shrieked the old man, turning his face
he believe? Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? There
in the realms of eternal peace and blessedness?" she thought.
"Father, tell me how it happened," she asked through her tears.
"Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian men and
Russia's glory were led to destruction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tell
Lise. I will follow."
calm peculiar to pregnant women. It was evident that her eyes did
not see Princess Mary but were looking within... into herself... at
something joyful and mysterious taking place within her.
held it below her waist.
her sister-in-law's dress.
Mary, I am going to love him very much," said Lise, looking with
away her tears on her sister-in-law's knee.
Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began
which she did not understand, agitated her. She said nothing but
looked about uneasily as if in search of something. Before dinner
the old prince, of whom she was always afraid, came into her room with
"No, you know it's too soon for news. But my father is anxious and I
"Nothing," answered Princess Mary, looking firmly with her radiant
She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to
hide the terrible news from her till after her confinement, which
was expected within a few days. Princess Mary and the old prince
each bore and hid their grief in their own way. The old prince would
been killed, and though he sent an official to Austria to seek for
her brother as living and was always awaiting news of his return.
"Dearest," said the little princess after breakfast on the morning
and even every footstep in that house since the terrible news had
one still more of the general sorrow.
calls it--has disagreed with me."
*Fruhstuck: breakfast.
ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law.
one of the maids who was present. (Mary Bogdanovna was a midwife
from the neighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills for the last
"Oh yes," assented Princess Mary, "perhaps that's it. I'll go.
the little princess' face, an expression of childish fear of
"No, it's only indigestion?... Say it's only indigestion, say so,
Mary! Say..." And the little princess began to cry capriciously like a
suffering child and to wring her little hands even with some
affectation. Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Mary
"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as she left the room.
The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small,
"Mary Bogdanovna, I think it's beginning!" said Princess Mary
hastening her steps. "You young ladies should not know anything
"But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?" said the
princess. (In accordance with Lise's and Prince Andrew's wishes they
had sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him at
their faces was a quiet and solemn look.
house, now and then opening her door when someone passed and
watching what was going on in the passage. Some women passing with
quiet steps in and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and
turned away. She did not venture to ask any questions, and shut the
door again, now sitting down in her easy chair, now taking her
prayer book, now kneeling before the icon stand. To her surprise and
distress she found that her prayers did not calm her excitement.
"I've come to sit with you a bit, Masha," said the nurse, "and
saint, my angel," she said with a sigh.
"Oh, nurse, I'm so glad!"
"God is merciful, birdie."
the door with her knitting. Princess Mary took a book and began
reading. Only when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one
Princess Mary experienced as she sat in her room. But owing to the
superstition that the fewer the people who know of it the less a woman
spoke of it, but apart from the ordinary staid and respectful good
manners habitual in the prince's household, a common anxiety, a
softening of the heart, and a consciousness that something great and
There was no laughter in the maids' large hall. In the men servants'
hall all sat waiting, silently and alert. In the outlying serfs'
prince, stepping on his heels, paced up and down his study and sent
Tikhon to ask Mary Bogdanovna what news.--"Say only that 'the prince
told me to ask,' and come and tell me her answer."
"Inform the prince that labor has begun," said Mary Bogdanovna,
did not hear the slightest sound from the study after that.
After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and,
seeing the prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his
perturbed face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed
or saying why he had entered. The most solemn mystery in the world
It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume
with lanterns were sent to the crossroads to guide him over the
country road with its hollows and snow-covered pools of water.
luminous eyes fixed on her nurse's wrinkled face (every line of
which she knew so well), on the lock of gray hair that escaped from
Nurse Savishna, knitting in hand, was telling in low tones, scarcely
hearing or understanding her own words, what she had told hundreds
Mary in Kishenev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead
of a midwife.
Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of the
the prince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the
damask curtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill,
snowy draft. Princess Mary shuddered; her nurse, putting down the
kerchief and her loose locks of gray hair.
said, holding the casement and not closing it. "With lanterns. Most
likely the doctor."
Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the
newcomer. As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the
out on the stairs. On a banister post stood a tallow candle which
guttered in the draft. On the landing below, Philip, the footman,
stood looking scared and holding another candle. Still lower, beyond
the turn of the staircase, one could hear the footstep of someone in
"Thank God!" said the voice. "And Father?"
"Gone to bed," replied the voice of Demyan the house steward, who
too extraordinary," and at the very moment she thought this, the
face and figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of
which covered with snow, appeared on the landing where the footman
the stairs and embraced his sister.
"You did not get my letter?" he asked, and not waiting for a
reply--which he would not have received, for the princess was unable
to speak--he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs again with the
doctor who had entered the hall after him (they had met at the last
post station), and again embraced his sister.
"What a strange fate, Masha darling!" And having taken off his cloak
and felt boots, he went to the little princess' apartment.
CHAPTER IX
The little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on
lay round her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosy
Andrew entered and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on
love you all and have done no harm to anyone; why must I suffer so?
Help me!" her look seemed to say. She saw her husband, but did not
realize the significance of his appearance before her now. Prince
Andrew went round the sofa and kissed her forehead.
"My darling!" he said--a word he had never used to her before.
"God is merciful...."
She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach.
said her eyes. She was not surprised at his having come; she did not
Bogdanovna advised Prince Andrew to leave the room.
Mary, again joined her. They began talking in whispers, but their talk
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room
next to hers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and
became confused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face with
his hands and remained so for some minutes. Piteous, helpless,
the door, and tried to open it. Someone was holding it shut.
He began pacing the room. The screaming ceased, and a few more
hers, she could not scream like that--came from the bedroom. Prince
an infant.
the first second. "A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Or
jaw, came out of the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor
gave him a bewildered look and passed by without a word. A woman
threshold. He went into his wife's room. She was lying dead, in the
same position he had seen her in five minutes before and, despite
the fixed eyes and the pallor of the cheeks, the same expression was
on her charming childlike face with its upper lip covered with tiny
squealed in Mary Bogdanovna's trembling white hands.
Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into his
like a vise round his son's neck, and without a word he began to sob
like a child.
Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew
farewell kiss. And there in the coffin was the same face, though
say, and Prince Andrew felt that something gave way in his soul and
that he was guilty of a sin he could neither remedy nor forget. He
could not weep. The old man too came up and kissed the waxen little
hands that lay quietly crossed one on the other on her breast, and
and why?" And at the sight the old man turned angrily away.
Andreevich was baptized. The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her
His grandfather, who was his godfather, trembling and afraid of
handed him over to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat
in another room, faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in
joyfully at the baby when the nurse brought it to him and nodded
sunk in the font but had floated.
CHAPTER X
Rostov's share in Dolokhov's duel with Bezukhov was hushed up by the
Moscow. As a result he could not go to the country with the rest of
the family, but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties.
his convalescence. Dolokhov lay ill at his mother's who loved him
of Rostov for his friendship to her Fedya, often talked to him about
her son.
"Yes, Count," she would say, "he is too noble and pure-souled for
together? And there! Bezukhov got off scotfree, while Fedya had to
through! It's true he has been reinstated, but how could they fail
to do that? I think there were not many such gallant sons of the
feeling, or honor? Knowing him to be an only son, to challenge him and
Who doesn't have intrigues nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as I
months. And then to call him out, reckoning on Fedya not fighting
because he owed him money! What baseness! What meanness! I know you
of you. Few people do understand him. He is such a lofty, heavenly
soul!"
Dolokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostov in a way
no one would have expected of him.
"I know people consider me a bad man!" he said. "Let them! I don't
so that I would give my life for them, and the others I'd throttle
if they stood in my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother, and two
about them in so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of them
have met loving, noble, high-minded men, but I have not yet met any
that divine purity and devotion I look for in women. If I found such a
one I'd give my life for her! But those!..." and he made a gesture of
I still hope to meet such a divine creature, who will regenerate,
In the autumn the Rostovs returned to Moscow. Early in the winter
Denisov also came back and stayed with them. The first half of the
winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostov spent in Moscow, was one of
the happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas
brought many young men to his parents' house. Vera was a handsome girl
flower; Natasha, half grown up and half child, was now childishly
At that time in the Rostovs' house there prevailed an amorous
atmosphere characteristic of homes where there are very young and very
impressionable, smiling young faces (smiling probably at their own
happiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the
fitful bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly
happiness.
Dolokhov, whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha. She
was a bad man, and that in the duel with Bezukhov, Pierre was right
unnatural.
self-will, "he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like your Denisov
though he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so you see I do
"Oh, Denisov is quite different," replied Nicholas, implying that
"Well, I don't know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. And
do you know he has fallen in love with Sonya?"
"What nonsense..."
"I'm certain of it; you'll see."
Natasha's prediction proved true. Dolokhov, who did not usually care
for the society of ladies, began to come often to the house, and the
question for whose sake he came (though no one spoke of it) was soon
have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time
at which they were present, and went to Iogel's balls for young people
and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
It was evident that this strange, strong man was under the
Rostov noticed something new in Dolokhov's relations with Sonya, but
he did not explain to himself what these new relations were.
"They're always in love with someone," he thought of Sonya and
Natasha. But he was not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov as
before and was less frequently at home.
In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the war
regular army, and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the
militia. Everywhere Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow
whole interest of these preparations for war lay in the fact that
termination of Denisov's furlough after Christmas to return with him
amusing himself, but rather gave zest to his pleasures. He spent the
greater part of his time away from home, at dinners, parties, and
balls.
CHAPTER XI
On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thing
he had rarely done of late. It was a grand farewell dinner, as he
About twenty people were present, including Dolokhov and Denisov.
Never had love been so much in the air, and never had the amorous
one thing we are interested in here," said the spirit of the place.
Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without
visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been
noticed and felt the tension of the amorous air in the house, and also
noticed a curious embarrassment among some of those present. Sonya,
Dolokhov, and the old countess were especially disturbed, and to a
sensitiveness natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both
that Iogel (the dancing master) gave for his pupils durings the
holidays.
"Nicholas, will you come to Iogel's? Please do!" said Natasha. "He
at the Rostovs' had jocularly assumed the role of Natasha's knight.
question he noticed that it should not have been put.
"Perhaps," coldly and angrily replied Dolokhov, glancing at Sonya,
and, scowling, he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given
confirmed in this conclusion by the fact that Dolokhov left
immediately after dinner. He called Natasha and asked her what was the
"And I was looking for you," said Natasha running out to him. "I
Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late,
orphan girl. From the point of view of the old countess and of society
it was out of the question for her to refuse him. And therefore
her childish promises and accept the offer," but before he had time to
"Yes, my Sonya could not have done otherwise!" thought Nicholas.
"Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, and I know she won't change
"Yes," said Natasha. "Do you know, Nicholas--don't be angry--but I
know you will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but I know
for certain that you won't marry her."
her. What a darling Sonya is!" he added with a smile.
"Ah, she is indeed a darling! I'll send her to you."
And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away.
A minute later Sonya came in with a frightened, guilty, and scared
"Sophie," he began, timidly at first and then more and more
"I have already refused," she said hurriedly.
Sonya again interrupted. She gave him an imploring, frightened look.
say it. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole
"That is enough for me," said Sonya, blushing.
again, though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship,
confidence, and love as I have for you. Then I am young. Mamma does
"Don't say that to me! I want nothing. I love you as a brother and
always shall, and I want nothing more."
"You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid of
misleading you."
Iogel's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So said the mothers
as they watched their young people executing their newly learned
women who came to these balls with an air of condescension and found
balls. The two pretty young Princesses Gorchakov met suitors there and
only those came who wished to dance and amuse themselves as girls of
time. With scarcely any exceptions they all were, or seemed to be,
Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom Natasha, who was
at this last ball only the ecossaise, the anglaise, and the mazurka,
which was just coming into fashion, were danced. Iogel had taken a
ballroom in Bezukhov's house, and the ball, as everyone said, was a
explanation with Nicholas, Sonya twirled about before she left home so
that the maid could hardly get her hair plaited, and she was
Natasha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a real
ball was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin with
pink ribbons.
was not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whatever
person she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment.
"How sweet she is--she will be a weal beauty!" said Denisov.
"Who are you talking about?"
"About your sister," ejaculated Denisov testily.
said little Iogel coming up to Nicholas. "Look how many charming young
former pupil of his.
"No, my dear fellow, I'll be a wallflower," said Denisov. "Don't you
wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?"
ladies and, leaning on his saber and beating time with his foot,
his little feet in low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall with
Natasha, who, though shy, went on carefully executing her steps.
a figure he beckoned to Rostov who was passing:
"This is not at all the thing," he said. "What sort of Polish
mazuwka is this? But she does dance splendidly."
masterly way in which he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up to
Natasha:
looking at her and waiting. Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusing
"Oh no, let me off, Countess," Denisov replied.
"They coax me as if I were Vaska the cat!" said Denisov jokingly.
"I'll sing for you a whole evening," said Natasha.
"Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with me!" said Denisov, and he
unhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped his
waiting for the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka was
he felt himself to be. At the right beat of the music he looked
round the room taking his partner with him. He glided silently on
was dashing straight at them, when suddenly, clinking his spurs and
second, stamped on the spot clanking his spurs, whirled rapidly round,
and, striking his left heel against his right, flew round again in a
circle. Natasha guessed what he meant to do, and abandoning herself to
him followed his lead hardly knowing how. First he spun her round,
on one knee he twirled her round him, and again jumping up, dashed
so impetuously forward that it seemed as if he would rush through
the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath, and then he
suddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps. When
he drew up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natasha did not
even make him a curtsy. She fixed her eyes on him in amazement,
smiling as if she did not recognize him.
"What does this mean?" she brought out.
Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real mazurka,
again as a partner, and the old men began smilingly to talk about
mopping himself with his handkerchief, sat down by Natasha and did not
leave her for the rest of the evening.
For two days after that Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his own or at
Dolokhov's home: on the third day he received a note from him:
As I do not intend to be at your house again for reasons you know
shown to the best room, which Dolokhov had taken for that evening.
Some twenty men were gathered round a table at which Dolokhov sat
money, and he was keeping the bank. Rostov had not seen him since
of how they would meet.
door, as though he had long expected him.
"It's a long time since we met," he said. "Thanks for coming. I'll
just finish dealing, and then Ilyushka will come with his chorus."
"You may punt," he said.
had then said.
"Or are you afraid to play with me?" Dolokhov now asked as if
guessing Rostov's thought.
Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the mood he had shown at the
had felt a need to escape from it by some strange, and usually
cruel, action.
deliberately so that everyone could hear:
"Do you remember we had a talk about cards... 'He's a fool who
trusts to luck, one should make certain,' and I want to try."
"To try his luck or the certainty?" Rostov asked himself.
pack of cards said: "Bank, gentlemen!"
side and at first did not play. Dolokhov kept glancing at him.
"Why don't you play?" he asked.
And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up
"I'll trust you."
"Gentlemen," said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time. "Please
"Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed. So I
ask you to put the money on your cards," replied Dolokhov. "Don't
stint yourself, we'll settle afterwards," he added, turning to Rostov.
The game continued; a waiter kept handing round champagne.
scored up against him. He wrote "800 rubles" on a card, but while
the waiter filled his glass he changed his mind and altered it to
"Leave it," said Dolokhov, though he did not seem to be even looking
at Rostov, "you'll win it back all the sooner. I lose to the others
Rostov submitted. He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a
floor. He well remembered that seven afterwards. He laid down the
champagne that was handed him, smiled at Dolokhov's words, and with
hands which held the pack. Much depended on Rostov's winning or losing
given his son two thousand rubles, and though he always disliked
this time. Nicholas had replied that it would be more than enough
for him and that he gave his word of honor not to take anything more
money, so that this seven of hearts meant for him not only the loss of
drive home to supper with Denisov, Natasha, and Sonya, and will
certainly never touch a card again." At that moment his home life,
his father, and even his comfortable bed in the house on the
Povarskaya rose before him with such vividness, clearness, and charm
long past. He could not conceive that a stupid chance, letting the
seven be dealt to the right rather than to the left, might deprive him
hands. Those broad, reddish hands, with hairy wrists visible from
under the shirt cuffs, laid down the pack and took up a glass and a
his chair, and began deliberately with a smile:
that I'm a sharper, so I advise you to be careful."
"Come now, deal!" exclaimed Rostov.
"Aah!" Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head. The
"Still, don't ruin yourself!" said Dolokhov with a side glance at
CHAPTER XIV
An hour and a half later most of the players were but little
hundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him,
which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he
vaguely supposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality it
already exceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dolokhov was no longer
him. He had decided to play until that score reached forty-three
thousand. He had fixed on that number because forty-three was the
hands, sat at the table which was scrawled over with figures, wet with
not leave him: that those broad-boned reddish hands with hairy
wrists visible from under the shirt sleeves, those hands which he
loved and hated, held him in their power.
"Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winning it back's
impossible... Oh, how pleasant it was at home!... The knave, double or
quits... it can't be!... And why is he doing this to me?" Rostov
pondered. Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dolokhov refused to
accept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas submitted to him,
and at one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at
first to hand from the crumpled heap under the table would save him,
now counted the cords on his coat and took a card with that number and
for aid from the other players, or peered at the now cold face of
Dolokhov and tried to read what was passing in his mind.
ruin. Wasn't he my friend? Wasn't I fond of him? But it's not his
fault. What's he to do if he has such luck?... And it's not my fault
either," he thought to himself, "I have done nothing wrong. Have I
killed anyone, or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such a
terrible misfortune? And when did it begin? Such a little while ago
I came to this table with the thought of winning a hundred rubles to
happy, so free, so lighthearted! And I did not realize how happy I
was! When did that end and when did this new, terrible state of things
begin? What marked the change? I sat all the time in this same place
agile hands in the same way. When did it happen and what has happened?
it can't be! Surely it will all end in nothing!"
He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, though the room was not
hot. His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its
helpless efforts to seem calm.
The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three
thousand. Rostov had just prepared a card, by bending the corner of
which he meant to double the three thousand just put down to his
score, when Dolokhov, slamming down the pack of cards, put it aside
and began rapidly adding up the total of Rostov's debt, breaking the
chalk as he marked the figures in his clear, bold hand.
"Supper, it's time for supper! And here are the gypsies!"
understood that it was all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:
"Well, won't you go on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if it
"It's all up! I'm lost!" thought he. "Now a bullet through my brain-
that's all that's left me!" And at the same time he said in a
cheerful voice:
"Come now, just this one more little card!"
"All right!" said Dolokhov, having finished the addition. "All
right! Twenty-one rubles," he said, pointing to the figure
twenty-one by which the total exceeded the round sum of forty-three
thousand; and taking up a pack he prepared to deal. Rostov
submissively unbent the corner of his card and, instead of the six
you will let me win this ten, or beat it."
moment those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy
"Yes, I'm tired too," said Rostov.
Rostov, flushing, drew Dolokhov into the next room.
"I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take an I.O.U.?" he said.
"I say, Rostov," said Dolokhov clearly, smiling and looking Nicholas
straight in the eyes, "you know the saying, 'Lucky in love, unlucky at
"Oh, it's terrible to feel oneself so in this man's power,"
thought Rostov. He knew what a shock he would inflict on his father
to escape it all, and felt that Dolokhov knew that he could save him
cat does with a mouse.
"Your cousin..." Dolokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted
mention her!" he exclaimed fiercely.
"Then when am I to have it?"
CHAPTER XV
To say "tomorrow" and keep up a dignified tone was not difficult,
confess and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word
of honor, was terrible.
At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The young people, after
returning from the theater, had had supper and were grouped round
poetic atmosphere of love which pervaded the Rostov household that
winter and, now after Dolokhov's proposal and Iogel's ball, seemed
to have grown thicker round Sonya and Natasha as the air does before a
thunderstorm. Sonya and Natasha, in the light-blue dresses they had
worn at the theater, looking pretty and conscious of it, were standing
by the clavichord, happy and smiling. Vera was playing chess with
Shinshin in the drawing room. The old countess, waiting for the return
ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord striking chords with his short
which he had composed, and to which he was trying to fit music:
   What spark has set my inmost soul on fire,
   What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?
"Splendid! Excellent!" exclaimed Natasha. "Another verse," she
said, without noticing Nicholas.
"Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natasha, running up to him.
"Is Papa at home?" he asked.
"I am so glad you've come!" said Natasha, without answering him. "We
are enjoying ourselves! Vasili Dmitrich is staying a day longer for my
sake! Did you know?"
"No, Papa is not back yet," said Sonya.
Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently
at her table began to watch her hands arranging the cards. From the
dancing room, they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to
"All wight! All wight!" shouted Denisov. "It's no good making
excuses now! It's your turn to sing the ba'cawolla--I entweat you!"
The countess glanced at her silent son.
"Oh, nothing," said he, as if weary of being continually asked the
same question. "Will Papa be back soon?"
"I expect so."
"Everything's the same with them. They know nothing about it!
room where the clavichord stood.
Sonya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to
Nicholas began pacing up and down the room.
nothing to be happy about!" thought he.
Sonya struck the first chord of the prelude.
"My God, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! A bullet through my
brain is the only thing left me--not singing!" his thoughts ran on.
"Go away? But where to? It's one--let them sing!"
ask. She noticed at once that something had happened to him.
as young people often do. "No, I am too happy now to spoil my
enjoyment by sympathy with anyone's sorrow," she felt, and she said to
herself: "No, I must be mistaken, he must be feeling happy, just as
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as
ballet dancers do, Natasha, rising energetically from her heels to her
toes, stepped to the middle of the room and stood still.
which Denisov followed her.
Natasha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose, her
leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill
no longer sang as a child, there was no longer in her singing that
comical, childish, painstaking effect that had been in it before;
but she did not yet sing well, as all the connoisseurs who heard her
said: "It is not trained, but it is a beautiful voice that must be
own powers, and an as yet untrained velvety softness, which so mingled
voice could be altered without spoiling it.
"What is this?" thought Nicholas, listening to her with widely
opened eyes. "What has happened to her? How she is singing today!" And
next note, the next phrase, and everything in the world was divided
two, three... One... "Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three...
One. "Oh, this senseless life of ours!" thought Nicholas. "All this
misery, and money, and Dolokhov, and anger, and honor--it's all
nonsense... but this is real.... Now then, Natasha, now then, dearest!
Now then, darling! How will she take that si? She's taken it! Thank
he sung a second, a third below the high note. "Ah, God! How fine! Did
I really take it? How fortunate!" he thought.
Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that was
finest in Rostov's soul! And this something was apart from
"What were losses, and Dolokhov, and words of honor?... All
nonsense! One might kill and rob and yet be happy..."
CHAPTER XVI
did that day. But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than
reality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word and
went downstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the old
"Well--had a good time?" said the old count, smiling gaily and
Nicholas tried to say "Yes," but could not: and he nearly burst into
condition.
"Ah, it can't be avoided!" thought Nicholas, for the first and
father to let him have the carriage to drive to town:
"Papa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forgetting.
"Dear me!" said his father, who was in a specially good humor. "I
told you it would not be enough. How much?"
smile, for which he was long unable to forgive himself, "I have lost a
little, I mean a good deal, a great deal--forty three thousand."
"What! To whom?... Nonsense!" cried the count, suddenly reddening
with an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.
"I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas.
"Well!..." said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinking
"It can't be helped It happens to everyone!" said the son, with a
crime. He longed to kiss his father's hands and kneel to beg his
forgiveness, but said, in a careless and even rude voice, that it
The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son's words and
began bustlingly searching for something.
"Yes, yes," he muttered, "it will be difficult, I fear, difficult to
the room.... Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at
all expected this.
seizing his father's hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into
tears.
While father and son were having their explanation, the mother and
"Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me..."
The countess did not believe her ears. Denisov had proposed. To
with dolls and who was still having lessons.
'nonsense!'"
The countess shrugged her shoulders.
"If it true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal, tell
him he is a fool, that's all!"
"No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indignantly and seriously.
him."
"No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?"
well for you," said Natasha, with a responsive smile. "You should have
seen how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came out
accidently."
"Well, all the same, you must refuse him."
"Well then, accept his offer. It's high time for you to be married,"
answered the countess sharply and sarcastically.
"No, Mamma, but I'm so sorry for him. I don't know how I'm to say
said the countess, indignant that they should have dared to treat this
little Natasha as grown up.
"No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you'll listen
with his face in his hands.
"Nataly," he said, moving with rapid steps toward her, "decide my
fate. It is in your hands."
"Vasili Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you!... No, but you are so
not understand. She kissed his rough curly black head. At this
instant, they heard the quick rustle of the countess' dress. She
came up to them.
"Vasili Dmitrich, I thank you for the honor," she said, with an
daughter is so young, and I thought that, as my son's friend, you
would have addressed yourself first to me. In that case you would
not have obliged me to give this refusal."
"Countess..." said Denisov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face. He
began to sob aloud.
"but believe me, I so adore your daughter and all your family that I
would give my life twice over..." He looked at the countess, and
her hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, without
looking at Natasha.
in Moscow. All Denisov's Moscow friends gave him a farewell
entertainment at the gypsies', with the result that he had no
recollection of how he was put in the sleigh or of the first three
After Denisov's departure, Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow,
without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father could
Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if she
wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her
love him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of
He filled the girls' albums with verses and music, and having at
last sent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and
received his receipt, he left at the end of November, without taking
leave of any of his acquaintances, to overtake his regiment which
was already in Poland.
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg. At the
would not supply them. Pierre was obliged to wait. Without undressing,
he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table, put his big
tea?" asked his valet.
question--one so important that he took no notice of what went on
around him. Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to
this station, but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it
spectacles unable to understand what they wanted or how they could
go on living without having solved the problems that so absorbed
him. He had been engrossed by the same thoughts ever since the day
he returned from Sokolniki after the duel and had spent that first
agonizing, sleepless night. But now, in the solitude of the journey,
they seized him with special force. No matter what he thought about,
and yet could not cease to ask himself. It was as if the thread of the
chief screw which held his life together were stripped, so that the
screw could not get in or out, but went on turning uselessly in the
excellency to wait only two hours, when, come what might, he would let
his excellency have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lying
"Is this good or bad?" Pierre asked himself. "It is good for me, bad
for another traveler, and for himself it's unavoidable, because he
thrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horses.
possible. And I," continued Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because I
considered myself injured, and Louis XVI was executed because they
should one love and what hate? What does one live for? And what am
I? What is life, and what is death? What power governs all?"
There was no answer to any of these questions, except one, and
that not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answer
was: "You'll die and all will end. You'll die and know all, or cease
asking." But dying was also dreadful.
The Torzhok peddler woman, in a whining voice, went on offering
her wares, especially a pair of goatskin slippers. "I have hundreds of
rubles I don't know what to do with, and she stands in her tattered
the money for? As if that money could add a hair's breadth to
happiness or peace of mind. Can anything in the world make her or me
eternity." And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread,
and again it turned uselessly in the same place.
struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. "And why did she resist her
into her heart an impulse that was against His will. My wife--as she
once was--did not struggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing has
"All we can know is that we know nothing. And that's the height of
human wisdom."
Everything within and around him seemed confused, senseless, and
"I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this
traveler, also detained for lack of horses.
The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled old
Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on a
a pair of felt boots on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn,
nankeen-covered, sheepskin coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa,
leaned back his big head with its broad temples and close-cropped
hair, and looked at Bezukhov. The stern, shrewd, and penetrating
the stranger, but by the time he had made up his mind to ask him a
shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of them
Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a
death's head. The stranger sat without stirring, either resting or, as
was also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache,
evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never
grown. This active old servant was unpacking the traveler's canteen
a tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to
whom he passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the
need, even the inevitability, of entering into conversation with
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down,* with an
unfinished bit of nibbled sugar, and asked if anything more would be
"No. Give me the book," said the stranger.
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional
All at once the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, and
time to turn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady
and severe gaze straight on Pierre's face.
CHAPTER II
mistaken," said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice.
Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles.
of your misfortune." He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to
happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune."--"I regret it very
much, my dear sir."
Pierre flushed and, hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed,
"I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, but
He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved aside on the sofa
by way of inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt
reluctant to enter into conversation with this old man, but,
submitting to him involuntarily, came up and sat down beside him.
"You are unhappy, my dear sir," the stranger continued. "You are
power."
"Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile. "I am very grateful
to you. Where are you traveling from?"
in spite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance were
"But if for reason you don't feel inclined to talk to me," said
unexpected and tenderly paternal way.
acquaintance," said Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger's
hands, he looked more closely at the ring, with its skull--a Masonic
"Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Mason?"
their name and my own I hold out a brotherly hand to you."
"I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between the
far from understanding--how am I to put it?--I am afraid my way of
looking at the world is so opposed to yours that we shall not
understand one another."
is the one held by the majority of people, and is the invariable fruit
of pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if
I had not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view of
"Just as I may suppose you to be deluded," said Pierre, with a faint
"I should never dare to say that I know the truth," said the
and firmness. "No one can attain to truth by himself. Only by laying
God," he added, and closed his eyes.
said Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it essential to
speak the whole truth.
The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with
millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he,
poor man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.
"Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir," said the Mason. "You cannot
know Him. You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy."
"Yes, yes, I am unhappy," assented Pierre. "But what am I to do?"
"You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very unhappy. You
is in thee, and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just
Whom hast thou denied?" he suddenly asked with exulting austerity
incomprehensible Being? didst thou, and why did the whole world,
He stopped and remained silent for a long time.
Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.
"He exists, but to understand Him is hard," the Mason began again,
leaves of his book with his old hands which from excitement he could
not keep still. "If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I
could bring him to thee, could take him by the hand and show him to
His infinity, and all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts
thou? Thou dreamest that thou art wise because thou couldst utter
those blasphemous words," he went on, with a somber and scornful
to say that, as he does not understand its use, he does not believe in
the master who made it. To know Him is hard.... For ages, from our
and are still infinitely far from our aim; but in our lack of
understanding we see only our weakness and His greatness...."
with shining eyes, not interrupting or questioning him, but
believed as a child believes, in the speaker's tone of conviction
conviction, or the calm firmness and certainty of his vocation,
which radiated from his whole being (and which struck Pierre
especially by contrast with his own dejection and hopelessness)--at
any rate, Pierre longed with his whole soul to believe and he did
"He is not to be apprehended by reason, but by life," said the
Mason.
in the Mason's arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him.
"I don't understand," he said, "how it is that the mind of man
cannot attain the knowledge of which you speak."
The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.
"The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish
to imbibe," he said. "Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure
"Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully.
"The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those
The highest wisdom has but one science--the science of the whole-
the science explaining the whole creation and man's place in it. To
self, and so before one can know, it is necessary to believe and to
perfect one's self. And to attain this end, we have the light called
"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
you are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all
these good gifts? Are you content with yourself and with your life?"
"No, I hate my life," Pierre muttered, wincing.
"Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thyself; and as thou art
purified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir. How
have you spent it? In riotous orgies and debauchery, receiving
everything from society and giving nothing in return. You have
done for your neighbor? Have you ever thought of your tens of
No! You have profited by their toil to lead a profligate life. That is
what you have done. Have you chosen a post in which you might be of
service to your neighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness.
her to find the way of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into an
you say you do not know God and hate your life. There is nothing
strange in that, my dear sir!"
After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse,
again leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes.
Pierre looked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face
and moved his lips without uttering a sound. He wished to say, "Yes, a
The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called
his servant.
you not rest here?"
"No, tell them to harness."
"Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told me
all, and without promising to help me?" thought Pierre, rising with
downcast head; and he began to pace the room, glancing occasionally at
contemptible and profligate life, though I did not like it and did not
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. The
fastening his coat. When he had finished, he turned to Bezukhov, and
said in a tone of indifferent politeness:
"Where are you going to now, my dear sir?"
not suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be what
you would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it
is I, above all, who am to blame for everything. Help me, teach me,
and perhaps I may..."
Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turned away.
The Mason remained silent for a long time, evidently considering.
"Help comes from God alone," he said, "but such measure of help as
Petersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski" (he took out his notebook
first of all devote some time to solitude and self-examination and
do not resume your former way of life. And now I wish you a good
entered... "and success."
postmaster's book. Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasons
and Martinists, even in Novikov's time. For a long while after he
down the room, pondering over his vicious past, and with a rapturous
seemed to him that he had been vicious only because he had somehow
forgotten how good it is to be virtuous. Not a trace of his former
doubts remained in his soul. He firmly believed in the possibility
of the brotherhood of men united in the aim of supporting one
itself to him.
On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his
arrival, he went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas a
Kempis, whose book had been sent him by someone unknown. One thing
unknown to him, of believing in the possibility of attaining
perfection, and in the possibility of active brotherly love among men,
which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to him. A week after his arrival,
the young Polish count, Willarski, whom Pierre had known slightly in
ceremonious manner in which Dolokhov's second had called on him,
and, having closed the door behind him and satisfied himself that
there was nobody else in the room, addressed Pierre.
Brotherhood has made application for you to be received into our Order
before the usual term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I
before met at balls, amiably smiling in the society of the most
Willarski bowed his head.
"One more question, Count," he said, "which beg you to answer in all
renounced your former convictions--do you believe in God?"
Pierre considered.
"Yes, I do believe in God," he repeated.
"In that case we can go," said Willarski. "My carriage is at your
as to what he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied
only to tell the truth.
Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had
aid of a servant. From there they passed into another room. A man in
a small wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never
some hairs painfully in the knot. Then he drew his face down, kissed
him, and taking him by the hand led him forward. The hairs tied in the
shamefaced smile. His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with a
puckered, though smiling face, moved after Willarski with uncertain,
timid steps.
Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.
"Whatever happens to you," he said, "you must bear it all manfully
if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood." (Pierre nodded
your eyes," added Willarski. "I wish you courage and success," and,
Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way. Once or twice he
take it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spent with his
eyes bandaged seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb, his legs
almost gave way, it seemed to him that he was tired out. He
experienced a variety of most complex sensations. He felt afraid of
felt curious to know what was going to happen and what would be
the actively virtuous life of which he had been dreaming since he
met Joseph Alexeevich. Loud knocks were heard at the door. Pierre took
the bandage off his eyes and glanced around him. The room was in black
darkness, only a small lamp was burning inside something white. Pierre
lay an open book. The book was the Gospel, and the white thing with
the lamp inside was a human skull with its cavities and teeth. After
reading the first words of the Gospel: "In the beginning was the
Word and the Word was with God," Pierre went round the table and saw a
large open box filled with something. It was a coffin with bones
an entirely new life quite unlike the old one, he expected
everything to be unusual, even more unusual than what he was seeing. A
this and even more. Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked around.
"God, death, love, the brotherhood of man," he kept saying to himself,
associating these words with vague yet joyful ideas. The door opened
and someone came in.
By the dim light, to which Pierre had already become accustomed,
he saw rather short man. Having evidently come from the light into the
darkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the
table and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands.
This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his
up from below.
you, who do not believe in the truth of the light and who have not
seen the light, come here? What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue,
enlightenment?"
At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierre
felt a sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his
a complete stranger, yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man.
With bated breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor (by
newcomer was an acquaintance--he wished him simply a brother and a
that the Rhetor had to repeat his question.
difficulty.
"Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on at once: "Have you any
your aim?" said he quietly and quickly.
"I... hope... for guidance... help... in regeneration," said Pierre,
with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his
excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in
Russian.
"What is your conception of Freemasonry?"
who have virtuous aims," said Pierre, feeling ashamed of the
inadequacy of his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he
spoke. "I imagine..."
"Good!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with this
answer. "Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in religion?"
Pierre, so softly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him
therefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?" said the
"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his gloved hands on his
"Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order," he said,
"and if this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood
with profit. The first and chief object of our Order, the foundation
on which it rests and which no human power can destroy, is the
preservation and handing on to posterity of a certain important
the first man--a mystery on which perhaps the fate of mankind depends.
But since this mystery is of such a nature that nobody can know or use
it unless he be prepared by long and diligent self-purification, not
hearts, to purify and enlighten their minds, by means handed on to
us by tradition from those who have striven to attain this mystery,
"By purifying and regenerating our members we try, thirdly, to
piety and virtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat the
again."
"To combat the evil which sways the world..." Pierre repeated, and a
mental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his
vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and
mankind, especially appealed to Pierre. The important mystery
mentioned by the Rhetor, though it aroused his curiosity, did not seem
to him essential, and the second aim, that of purifying and
faults and was ready for all that was good.
temple, which every Freemason should cultivate in himself. These
Love of mankind.  5. Courage.  6. Generosity.  7. The love of death.
"In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of death," the
from this distressful life, and leads it to its place of recompense
and peace."
"Yes, that must be so," thought Pierre, when after these words the
Rhetor went away, leaving him to solitary meditation. "It must be
already in his soul: courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind,
a joy. (He now felt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and to
what the seventh virtue was and could not recall it.
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre
whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to
all that would be required of him.
"I must also inform you," said the Rhetor, "that our Order
delivers its teaching not in words only but also by other means, which
wisdom and virtue than mere words. This chamber with what you see
therein should already have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere,
more than words could do. You will perhaps also see in your further
initiation a like method of enlightenment. Our Order imitates the
ancient societies that explained their teaching by hieroglyphics. A
cognizable by the senses but which possesses qualities resembling
Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak. He
listened to the Rhetor in silence, feeling from all he said that his
ordeal was about to begin.
"If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation," said the Rhetor
coming closer to Pierre. "In token of generosity I ask you to give
me all your valuables."
"But I have nothing here," replied Pierre, supposing that he was
Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage
had been done, the Rhetor said:
"In token of obedience, I ask you to undress."
the Rhetor's instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre's
left breast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his
trousers to above the knee. Pierre hurriedly began taking off his
smile of embarrassment, doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on
his face against his will, Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and
commands.
passion," said the latter.
"My passion! I have had so many," replied Pierre.
"That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on
went over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of them to
"Women," he said in a low, scarcely audible voice.
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this
"For the last time I say to you--turn all your attention upon
passion but in your own heart. The source of blessedness is not
without us but within...."
CHAPTER IV
Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre,
not the Rhetor but Pierre's sponsor, Willarski, whom he recognized
by his voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of his
resolution Pierre replied: "Yes, yes, I agree," and with a beaming,
childlike smile, his fat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and
timidly in one slippered and one booted foot, he advanced, while
Willarski held a sword to his bare chest. He was conducted from that
room along passages that turned backwards and forwards and was at last
brought to the doors of the Lodge. Willarski coughed, he was
answered by the Masonic knock with mallets, the doors opened before
them. A bass voice (Pierre was still blindfold) questioned him as to
who he was, when and where he was born, and so on. Then he was again
led somewhere still blindfold, and as they went along he was told
noticed that he was spoken of now as the "Seeker," now as the
various knockings with mallets and swords. As he was being led up to
some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty among his
whose white shirt was stained with blood. On seeing this, Pierre moved
forward with his breast toward the swords, meaning them to pierce
blindfolded again.
"Now thou hast seen the lesser light," uttered a voice. Then the
candles were relit and he was told that he would see the full light;
room and at the people in it. Round a long table covered with black
of them Pierre had met in Petersburg society. In the President's chair
his neck. On his right sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre had met at
Kuragins'. All maintained a solemn silence, listening to the words
with various figures worked upon it, at the other was something
at the Gates of the Temple.
"He must first receive the trowel," whispered one of the brothers.
obeying, and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. "Where am I? What am I
serious faces of those around, remembered all he had already gone
through, and realized that he could not stop halfway. He was aghast at
his hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling,
prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, the
feeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before.
When he had lain there some time, he was told to get up, and a white
addressed him. He told him that he should try to do nothing to stain
the whiteness of that apron, which symbolized strength and purity;
then of the unexplained trowel, he told him to toil with it to cleanse
his own heart from vice, and indulgently to smooth with it the heart
Pierre could not know their meaning but must keep them. The second
pair of man's gloves he was to wear at the meetings, and finally of
the third, a pair of women's gloves, he said: "Dear brother, these
Master said these last words it seemed to Pierre that he grew
embarrassed. Pierre himself grew still more confused, blushed like a
child till tears came to his eyes, began looking about him uneasily,
This silence was broken by one of the brethren, who led Pierre up to
the rug and began reading to him from a manuscript book an explanation
of all the figures on it: the sun, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, a
trowel, a rough stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three windows,
and so on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was shown the signs
state to understand what was being read. He managed to follow only the
Grand Master, "but those between virtue and vice. Beware of making any
distinctions which may infringe equality. Fly to a brother's aid
whoever he may be, exhort him who goeth astray, raise him that
courteous. Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue. Share thy
bliss. Forgive thy enemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing him
He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, with
tears of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how to
him on all sides. He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in all
with them.
The Grand Master rapped with his mallet. All the Masons sat down
in their places, and one of them read an exhortation on the
necessity of humility.
and the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of "Collector of
Alms" went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked to
subscribe all he had, but fearing that it might look like pride
subscribed the same amount as the others.
The meeting was at an end, and on reaching home Pierre felt as if he
CHAPTER V
The day after he had been received into the Lodge, Pierre was
and then his attention wandered from the book and the Square and he
Emperor and that it would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. Pierre
proposed going to his estates in the south and there attending to
Prince Vasili, as he entered. "I know all about it, and I can tell you
positively that Helene is as innocent before you as Christ was
before the Jews."
"And why didn't you simply come straight to me as to a friend? I
know all about it and understand it all," he said. "You behaved as
becomes a man values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won't go
and me in the eyes of society, and even of the court," he added,
Remember, dear boy," and he drew Pierre's arm downwards, "it is simply
a letter at once, and she'll come here and all will be explained, or
else, my dear boy, let me tell you it's quite likely you'll have to
"I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a
Helene."
had firmly resolved to answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the words
of the Masonic statutes, "be kindly and courteous," recurred to him.
He blinked, went red, got up and sat down again, struggling with
Prince Vasili's tone of careless self-assurance that he felt he
would be unable to withstand it now, but he also felt that on what
he said now his future depended--whether he would follow the same
old road, or that new path so attractively shown him by the Masons, on
I'll write to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf."
But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful speech, Pierre,
without looking at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like his
"Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please go!" And he jumped up
and opened the door for him.
"Go!" he repeated, amazed at himself and glad to see the look of
confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili's face.
"Go!" the quivering voice repeated. And Prince Vasili had to go
A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the
Masons, and leaving large sums of money with them for alms, went
away to his estates. His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and
CHAPTER VI
The duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and, in spite
of the Emperor's severity regarding duels at that time, neither the
principals nor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of the
duel, confirmed by Pierre's rupture with his wife, was the talk of
when he was an illegitimate son, and petted and extolled when he was
the best match in Russia, had sunk greatly in the esteem of society
after his marriage--when the marriageable daughters and their
mothers had nothing to hope from him--especially as he did not know
how, and did not wish, to court society's favor. Now he alone was
blamed for what had happened, he was said to be insanely jealous and
by all her acquaintances not only cordially, but even with a shade
characteristic tact she had acquired though she did not understand its
significance. This expression suggested that she had resolved to
laid upon her by God. Prince Vasili expressed his opinion more openly.
He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and, pointing to
"I said at the time and before anyone else" (she insisted on her
priority) "that that senseless young man was spoiled by the depraved
ideas of these days. I said so even at the time when everybody was
in raptures about him, when he had just returned from abroad, and
when, if you remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my
and foretold all that has happened."
soirees as before--such as she alone had the gift of arranging--at
which was to be found "the cream of really good society, the bloom
of the intellectual essence of Petersburg," as she herself put it.
Besides this refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna's receptions
were also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new
and interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the
state of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court
society so dearly and distinctly indicated.
Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon's
Napoleon was beginning, Anna Pavlovna gave one of her soirees. The
forsaken by her husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte
who had just returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a
young man referred to in that drawing room as "a man of great merit"
(un homme de beaucoup de merite), a newly appointed maid of honor
and her mother, and several other less noteworthy persons.
was Boris Drubetskoy, who had just arrived as a special messenger from
The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company
countenance Bonaparte, and to cause me, and us in general, annoyance
and mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter. We shall not
cease to express our sincere views on that subject, and can only say
to the King Prussia and others: 'So much the worse for you. Tu l'as
voulu, George Dandin,' that's all we have to say about it!"
drawing room, almost all the company had assembled, and the
Boris, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy and
uniform of an aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay his
Anna Pavlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him
to several persons whom he did not know, giving him a whispered
description of each.
"Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, M. Krug, the charge d'affaires from 
Copenhagen--a profound intellect," and simply, "Mr. Shitov--a 
Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna's efforts, his own tastes, and the
service to place himself very advantageously. He was aide-de-camp to a
Prussia, and had just returned from there as a special messenger. He
had become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which
he had been so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensign
might rank incomparably higher than a general, and according to
which what was needed for success in the service was not effort or
surprised at the rapidity of his success and at the inability of
his plans for his future, were completely altered. He was not rich,
but would spend his last groat to be better dressed than others, and
would rather deprive himself of many pleasures than allow himself to
be seen in a shabby equipage or appear in the streets of Petersburg in
an old uniform. He made friends with and sought the acquaintance of
only those above him in position and who could therefore be of use
the Rostovs' house and of his childish love for Natasha was unpleasant
his departure for the army. To be in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room he
considered an important step up in the service, and he at once
understood his role, letting his hostess make use of whatever interest
he had to offer. He himself carefully scanned each face, appraising
the possibilities of establishing intimacy with each of those present,
him beside the fair Helene and listened to the general conversation.
that not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure
actual phrase used by the Vienna cabinet," said the Danish charge
d'affaires.
"The doubt is flattering," said "the man of profound intellect,"
with a subtle smile.
"We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of
Austria," said Mortemart. "The Emperor of Austria can never have
thought of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it."
reason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined
French pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversing
with a Frenchman), "L'Urope ne sera jamais notre alliee sincere."*
*"Europe will never be our sincere ally."
Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers, awaiting his
asked Boris to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state
his own about the facts he was recounting. For some time he
engrossed the general attention, and Anna Pavlovna felt that the
novelty she had served up was received with pleasure by all her
visitors. The greatest attention of all to Boris' narrative was
shown by Helene. She asked him several questions about his journey and
implied that, for certain considerations he could not know of, this
was absolutely necessary.
Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a
pretext that her aunt wished to hear him.
eyes and indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture. "Ah, she is
such an unfortunate and charming woman! Don't mention him before
her--please don't! It is too painful for her!"
When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte
had the ear of the company.
"Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said interrogatively, again
Pavlovna waited for him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided to
Hippolyte interrupted her with the words: "Le Roi de Prusse..." and
again, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and
said no more.
"Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?"
Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing.
"Oh, it's nothing. I only wished to say..." (he wanted to repeat a
joke he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that
Boris smiled circumspectly, so that it might be taken as ironical or
"Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," said Anna Pavlovna,
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on
the political news. It became particularly animated toward the end
of the evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were
mentioned.
"You know N--N--received a snuffbox with the portrait last year?"
same distinction?"
"There are precedents, I may mention Schwarzenberg."
When everybody rose to go, Helene who had spoken very little all the
evening again turned to Boris, asking him in a tone of caressing
"It is of great importance to me," she said, turning with a smile
with which she spoke of her exalted patroness, supported Helene's
wish.
It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evening
about the Prussian army, Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see
him. She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he
came on Tuesday.
Boris received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for
him to come. There were other guests and the countess talked little to
him, and only as he kissed her hand on taking leave said
"Come to dinner tomorrow... in the evening. You must come.... Come!"
countess' house.
CHAPTER VIII
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier.
Everywhere one heard curses on Bonaparte, "the enemy of mankind."
from the seat of war came contradictory news, false as usual and
Prince Andrew, and Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805.
then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout
Russia. Despite the weakness of age, which had become particularly
noticeable since the time when he thought his son had been killed,
appointed by the Emperor himself, and this fresh opportunity for
action gave him new energy and strength. He was continually
traveling through the three provinces entrusted to him, was pedantic
in the fulfillment of his duties, severe to cruelty with his
subordinates, and went into everything down to the minutest details
himself. Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in mathematics from
him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet nurse and nurse
Savishna in the late princess' rooms and Princess Mary spent most of
the day in the nursery, taking a mother's place to her little nephew
as best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed passionately
fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herself to give
her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel--as she called
her nephew--and playing with him.
wings ready to fly upwards. The angel's upper lip was slightly
raised as though about to smile, and once on coming out of the
what was still stranger, though of this Prince Andrew said nothing
to his sister, was that in the expression the sculptor had happened to
to me?"
Soon after Prince Andrew's return the old prince made over to him
a large estate, Bogucharovo, about twenty-five miles from Bald
Hills. Partly because of the depressing memories associated with
and spent most of his time there.
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved
not to continue his military service, and when the war recommenced and
everybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in the
campaign, while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in the
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father's
absence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days. The coachman
who had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the
letters to Princess Mary's apartments, but did not find him there.
He was told that the prince had gone to the nursery.
unintentionally, he poured too many drops into the glass. He threw the
There were in the room a child's cot, two boxes, two armchairs, a
did not fall on the cot.
"My dear," said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from beside
off--and this is what comes of it!" said Prince Andrew in an
exasperated whisper, evidently meaning to wound his sister.
"My dear, really... it's better not to wake him... he's asleep,"
said the princess in a tone of entreaty.
wineglass in hand.
boy who was in a high fever. These last days, mistrusting their
household doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town,
another and reproached and disputed with each other.
"Petrusha has come with papers from your father," whispered the
Prince Andrew went out.
instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his
father's letter, he returned to the nursery.
"Well?" he asked.
"Still the same. Wait, for heaven's sake. Karl Ivanich always says
with a sigh.
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.
"Confound you and your Karl Ivanich!" He took the glass with the
drops and again went up to the cot.
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively
hoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out and
sat down on a sofa in the next room.
He still had all the letters in his hand. Opening them
mechanically he began reading. The old prince, now and then using
follows:
Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful
victory over Buonaparte at Eylau. In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing,
and the rewards sent to the army are innumerable. Though he is a
German--I congratulate him! I can't make out what the commander at
I'll have his head off if everything is not here in a week. Have
Petenka--he took part in it--and it's all true. When mischief-makers
fleeing in great disorder. Mind you gallop off to Korchevo without
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. It
it up without reading it and reread his father's letter, ending with
"No, pardon me, I won't go now till the child is better," thought
he, going to the door and looking into the nursery.
Andrew, recalling his father's letter. "Yes, we have gained a
victory over Bonaparte, just when I'm not serving. Yes, yes, he's
always poking fun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!" And he began reading
Bilibin's letter which was written in French. He read without
CHAPTER IX
Bilibin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity, and
though he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms,
he described the whole campaign with a fearless self-censure and
of diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in
Prince Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the
army. The letter was old, having been written before the battle at
Preussisch-Eylau.
Bilibin, "as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters. I
me; what I have seen during these last three months is incredible.
"I begin ab ovo. 'The enemy of the human race,' as you know, attacks
the Prussians. The Prussians are our faithful allies who have only
turns out that 'the enemy of the human race' pays no heed to our
Prussians without giving them time to finish the parade they had
begun, and in two twists of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and
"'I most ardently desire,' writes the King of Prussia to
Bonaparte, 'that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my
circumstances allowed, I have hastened to take all steps to that
on being polite to the French and lay down their arms at the first
"In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude,
in war on our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia. We have
everything in perfect order, only one little thing is lacking, namely,
might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so
Suvorov-like, in a kibitka, and is received with acclamations of joy
"On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg. The mails
are taken to the field marshal's room, for he likes to do everything
himself. I am called in to help sort the letters and take those
meant for us. The field marshal looks on and waits for letters
addressed to him. We search, but none are to be found. The field
marshal grows impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters
seizes the letters, opens them, and reads those from the Emperor
addressed to others. 'Ah! So that's the way they treat me! No
'I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the
is exposed, and without fuel or forage, so something must be done,
and, as you yourself reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday, you must
"'From all my riding,' he writes to the Emperor, 'I have got a
prevents my riding and commanding so vast an army, so I have passed on
the command to the general next in seniority, Count Buxhowden,
of Prussia, for only one day's ration of bread remains, and in some
fortnight there will not be a healthy man left in it by spring.
already in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the great
and glorious task for which he was chosen. I shall await your most
the part of a secretary rather than commander in the army. My
removal from the army does not produce the slightest stir--a blind man
"The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,
"This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasingly
appears that we are within sight of the enemy and must give battle.
does not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who
opportunity to fight a battle 'on his own hand' as the Germans say. He
does so. This is the battle of Pultusk, which is considered a great
or lost. Those who retreat after a battle have lost it is what we say;
and according to that it is we who lost the battle of Pultusk. In
short, we retreat after the battle but send a courier to Petersburg
with news of a victory, and General Bennigsen, hoping to receive
victory, does not give up the command of the army to General
Buxhowden. During this interregnum we begin a very original and
interesting series of maneuvers. Our aim is no longer, as it should
be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to avoid General
Buxhowden who by right of seniority should be our chief. So
energetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing an
unfordable river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from our
enemy, who at the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhowden. General
Buxhowden was all but attacked and captured by a superior enemy
force as a result of one of these maneuvers that enabled us to
escape him. Buxhowden pursues us--we scuttle. He hardly crosses the
river to our side before we recross to the other. At last our enemy.
result is a challenge on Buxhowden's part and an epileptic fit on
vanquished; we can now turn our thoughts to the second, Bonaparte. But
as it turns out, just at that moment a third enemy rises before us-
biscuits, fodder, and whatnot! The stores are empty, the roads
impassable. The Orthodox begin looting, and in a way of which our last
campaign can give you no idea. Half the regiments form bands and scour
the countryside and put everything to fire and sword. The
headquarters, and the commander in chief has to ask for a battalion to
disperse them. During one of these attacks they carried off my empty
fear this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other."
in spite of himself (although he knew how far it was safe to trust
Bilibin), what he had read began to interest him more and more. When
he had read thus far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it away.
It was not what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the life
out there in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut his
eyes, rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what
he thought he heard a strange noise through the door. He was seized
with alarm lest something should have happened to the child while he
was reading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and
Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from
"My dear," he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behind
him.
As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he was
seized by an unreasoning panic--it occurred to him that the child
was dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.
it empty and that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew the
curtain aside and for some time his frightened, restless eyes could
not find the baby. At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about
was smacking his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly.
Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he had
him, tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish. The
not dead, but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent.
gazing at his head and at the little arms and legs which showed
appeared under the curtain of the cot. He did not look round, but
still gazing at the infant's face listened to his regular breathing.
noiseless steps, lifted the curtain, and dropped it again behind
"I was coming to tell you so."
The child moved slightly in his sleep, smiled, and rubbed his
forehead against the pillow.
Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain
her luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy
slightly catching the curtain of the cot. Each made the other a
warning gesture and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain
off from all the world. Prince Andrew was the first to move away,
ruffling his hair against the muslin of the curtain.
"Yes, this is the one thing left me now," he said with a sigh.
CHAPTER X
to the Kiev province, where he had the greatest number of serfs,
own guidance as to what he should do on his estates.
steps would be taken immediately to free his serfs--and that till then
they were not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursing their
babies were not to be sent to work, assistance was to be given to
hospitals, asylums, and schools were to be established on all the
estates. Some of the stewards (there were semiliterate foremen among
them) listened with alarm, supposing these words to mean that the
money, some after their first fright were amused by Pierre's lisp
hearing how the master talked, while the cleverest among them,
including the chief steward, understood from this speech how they
could best handle the master for their own ends.
but remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go
into the general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory.
an income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a
year, Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him
an allowance of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim perception of the
following budget:
About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank,
house, and the allowance to the three princesses; about 15,000 was
sent to the countess; about 70,00 went for interest on debts. The
building of a new church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 in
100,000 rubles, was spent, and almost every year he was obliged to
borrow. Besides this the chief steward wrote every year telling him of
and workshops. So the first task Pierre had to face was one for
He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward. But he
felt that this did not forward matters at all. He felt that these
consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with
them or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put the
state of things to him in the very worst light, pointing out the
Pierre demanded that steps should be taken to liberate the serfs,
loans from the Land Bank, and the consequent impossibility of a speedy
emancipation.
selling the forests in the province of Kostroma, the land lower down
complicated measures--the removal of injunctions, petitions,
"Yes, yes, do so."
Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled
considered these consultations very valuable for the proprietor and
troublesome to himself.
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and strangers hastened
greatest weakness--the one to which he had confessed when admitted
to the Lodge--were so strong that he could not resist them. Again
whole days, weeks, and months of his life passed in as great a rush
and were as much occupied with evening parties, dinners, lunches,
and balls, giving him no time for reflection, as in Petersburg.
Instead of the new life he had hoped to lead he still lived the old
life, only in new surroundings.
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not
fulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example of
and the love of death. He consoled himself with the thought that he
fulfilled another of the precepts--that of reforming the human race-
and had other virtues--love of his neighbor, and especially
orders had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom
The chief steward, who considered the young count's attempts
almost insane--unprofitable to himself, to the count, and to the
serfs--made some concessions. Continuing to represent the liberation
buildings--schools, hospitals, and asylums--on all the estates
before the master arrived. Everywhere preparations were made not for
ceremonious welcomes (which he knew Pierre would not like), but for
just such gratefully religious ones, with offerings of icons and the
bread and salt of hospitality, as, according to his understanding of
his master, would touch and delude him.
The southern spring, the comfortable rapid traveling in a Vienna
Pierre. The estates he had not before visited were each more
picturesque than the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and
touchingly grateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere
were receptions, which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a
joyful feeling in the depth of his heart. In one place the peasants
presented him with bread and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint
he had conferred on them, to build a new chantry to the church at
for releasing them from hard work. On a third estate the priest,
bearing a cross, came to meet him surrounded by children whom, by
the count's generosity, he was instructing in reading, writing, and
religion. On all his estates Pierre saw with his own eyes brick
buildings erected or in course of erection, all on one plan, for
Everywhere he saw the stewards' accounts, according to which the
thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue coats.
What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him
with bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peter
and Paul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter's
day, and that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had
that villages were in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not know
land, they did still harder work on their own land. He did not know
that the priest who met him with the cross oppressed the peasants by
his exactions, and that the pupils' parents wept at having to let
built by serfs whose manorial labor was thus increased, though
lessened on paper. He did not know that where the steward had shown
him in the accounts that the serfs' payments had been diminished by
a third, their obligatory manorial work had been increased by a
half. And so Pierre was delighted with his visit to his estates and
quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had left
Petersburg, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his "brother-instructor"
thought Pierre, "and how little attention we pay to it!"
He was pleased at the gratitude he received, but felt abashed at
receiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do
for these simple, kindly people.
The chief steward, a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectly
through the naive and intelligent count and played with him as with
a toy, seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre,
pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above
was.
happen to them when they were free, but he insisted, though
release them from the Land Bank, but would probably never even inquire
empty and that the serfs continued to give in money and work all
that other people's serfs gave--that is to say, all that could be
state of mind, Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of
house lay behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and
with banks still bare of grass. It was at the end of a village that
stretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which
were a few fir trees.
The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, outhouses, stables,
a bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular facade
still in course of construction. Round the house was a garden newly
laid out. The fences and gates were new and solid; two fire pumps
straight, the bridges were strong and had handrails. Everything bore
an impress of tidiness and good management. Some domestic serfs Pierre
small newly built lodge close to the pond. Anton, a man who had looked
after Prince Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage,
said that the prince was at home, and showed him into a clean little
anteroom.
after the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend
He quickly entered the small reception room with its
still-unplastered wooden walls redolent of pine, and would have gone
farther, but Anton ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door.
"Ask him to wait," and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed
back.
Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to
and looked at him closely.
Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his friend with
surprise. He was struck by the change in him. His words were kindly
lifeless and in spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give
them a joyous and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner,
separation, it was long before their conversation could settle on
they knew ought to be talked over at length. At last the
lightly touched on: their past life, plans for the future, Pierre's
journeys and occupations, the war, and so on. The preoccupation and
despondency which Pierre had noticed in his friend's look was now
Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyful animation of the past
sympathize with what Pierre was saying, but could not. The latter
began to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his enthusiasms,
dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in Prince Andrew's
presence. He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views, which had
checked himself, fearing to seem naive, yet he felt an irresistible
quite different, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersburg.
"I can't tell you how much I have lived through since then. I hardly
know myself again."
"Yes, we have altered much, very much, since then," said Prince
"Well, and you? What are your plans?"
as if astonished at the word. "Well, you see, I'm building. I mean
Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew's face,
"No, I meant to ask..." Pierre began, but Prince Andrew
travels and all you have been doing on your estates."
Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates, trying as
he had been doing, as though it were all an old-time story, and he
Pierre was telling him.
Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend's company
"I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said Prince Andrew, who
am only bivouacking here and have just come to look round. I am
going back to my sister today. I will introduce you to her. But of
course you know her already," he said, evidently trying to entertain a
visitor with whom he now found nothing in common. "We will go after
dinner. And would you now like to look round my place?"
political news and common acquaintances like people who do not know
each other intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and
interest only of the new homestead he was constructing and its
himself:
At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre's marriage.
hurriedly: "I will tell you some time how it all happened. But you
know it is all over, and forever."
"And so you had to go through that too!"
"One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man," said
"Why is it wrong?" urged Prince Andrew. "It is not given to man to
know what is right and what is wrong. Men always did and always will
err, and in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong."
"What does harm to another is wrong," said Pierre, feeling with
pleasure that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was
roused, had begun to talk, and wanted to express what had brought
"And who has told you what is bad for another man?" he asked.
"Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre. "We all know what is bad for
ourselves."
"Yes, we know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself is
something I cannot inflict on others," said Prince Andrew, growing
more and more animated and evidently wishing to express his new
outlook to Pierre. He spoke in French. "I only know two very real
those evils. To live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole
philosophy now."
"And love of one's neighbor, and self-sacrifice?" began Pierre. "No,
I can't agree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and not to
have to repent is not enough. I lived like that, I lived for myself
and ruined my life. And only now when I am living, or at least trying"
(Pierre's modesty made him correct himself) "to live for others,
not agree with you, and you do not really believe what you are
saying." Prince Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.
"When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you'll get on with her,"
he said. "Perhaps you are right for yourself," he added after a
short pause, "but everyone lives in his own way. You lived for
yourself and say you nearly ruined your life and only found
reverse. I lived for glory.--And after all what is glory? The same
love of others, a desire to do something for them, a desire for
their approval.--So I lived for others, and not almost, but quite,
for myself."
growing excited. "What about your son, your sister, and your father?"
And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression. He
evidently wished to draw him on.
"What error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good, and even
doing a little--though I did very little and did it very badly? What
like ourselves, were growing up and dying with no idea of God and
truth beyond ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructed
consolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dying
for the aged? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable good if a
them rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurrying and lisping. "And I have
done that though badly and to a small extent; but I have done
something toward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not a
the only sure happiness in life."
"Yes, if you put it like that it's quite a different matter," said
Prince Andrew. "I build a house and lay out a garden, and you build
right and what's good must be judged by one who knows all, but not
They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which
served as a veranda.
"Come, let's argue then," said Prince Andrew, "You talk of schools,"
he went on, crooking a finger, "education and so forth; that is, you
want to raise him" (pointing to a peasant who passed by them taking
off his cap) "from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual
needs, while it seems to me that animal happiness is the only
happiness possible, and that is just what you want to deprive him
of. I envy him, but you want to make him what I am, without giving him
my means. Then you say, 'lighten his toil.' But as I see it,
existence, as mental activity is to you or me. You can't help
thinking. I go to bed after two in the morning, thoughts come and I
can't sleep but toss about till dawn, because I think and can't help
thinking, just as he can't help plowing and mowing; if he didn't, he
would go to the drink shop or fall ill. Just as I could not stand
could not stand my physical idleness, but would grow fat and die.
he is dying, and you come and bleed him and patch him up. He will drag
about as a cripple, a burden to everybody, for another ten years. It
would be far easier and simpler for him to die. Others are being
born and there are plenty of them as it is. It would be different if
you grudged losing a laborer--that's how I regard him--but you want to
cure him from love of him. And he does not want that. And besides,
what a notion that medicine ever cured anyone! Killed them, yes!" said
he, frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre.
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that
spoke readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long
time. His glance became more animated as his conclusions became more
hopeless.
"Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" said Pierre. "I don't understand
ago, in Moscow and when traveling, but at such times I collapsed so
you?..."
contrary one must try to make one's life as pleasant as possible.
I'm alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best
"But with such ideas what motive have you for living? One would
sit without moving, undertaking nothing...."
"Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be thankful to do
nothing, but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me
the honor to choose me to be their marshal; it was all I could do to
qualifications for it--the kind of good-natured, fussy shallowness
necessary for the position. Then there's this house, which must be
built in order to have a nook of one's own in which to be quiet. And
now there's this recruiting."
of the Third District, and my only way of avoiding active service is
to serve under him."
He paused a little while.
power that he is terrible, and now he has this authority of a
commander in chief of the recruiting, granted by the Emperor. If I had
afterwards."
"Well, there you see!"
had stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have been
very glad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my father--that again
is for myself."
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated. His eyes glittered
feverishly while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there
a very good thing, but not for you--I don't suppose you ever had
I pity, and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. You
may not have seen, but I have seen, how good men brought up in those
traditions of unlimited power, in time when they grow more
irritable, become cruel and harsh, are conscious of it, but cannot
restrain themselves and grow more and more miserable."
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking
that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his
He did not reply.
and not the serfs' backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave as you
"No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you," said
Pierre.
CHAPTER XII
silence now and then with remarks which showed that he was in a good
temper.
apparently immersed in his own thoughts.
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, did
enlighten, and raise him. But as soon as he thought of what he
of exposing to possible ridicule what to him was precious and sacred.
"No, but why do you think so?" Pierre suddenly began, lowering his
head and looking like a bull about to charge, "why do you think so?
You should not think so."
"Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew with surprise.
like that, and do you know what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don't
was: Freemasonry is the best expression of the best, the eternal,
from the bonds of State and Church, a teaching of equality,
outside this union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree
with you that nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to
live out his life, like you, merely trying not to harm others. But
make our fundamental convictions your own, join our brotherhood,
give yourself up to us, let yourself be guided, and you will at once
Prince Andrew, looking straight in front of him, listened in silence
and by the peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew's eyes and by
Prince Andrew would not interrupt him or laugh at what he said.
They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they
silently at the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun.
"Well, what do you think about it?" Pierre asked. "Why are you
silent?"
are we? Men. How is it you know everything? Why do I alone not see
what you see? You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth, but I
don't see it."
time to reply, took the repetition for a denial, the more readily as
he knew Prince Andrew's former atheistic convictions.
could I, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the
end of everything. On earth, here on this earth" (Pierre pointed to
the fields), "there is no truth, all is false and evil; but in the
who are now the children of earth are--eternally--children of the
whole universe. Don't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast
the lower and higher beings, in this vast harmonious multitude of
beings in whom the Deity--the Supreme Power if you prefer the term--is
manifest? If I see, clearly see, that ladder leading from plant to
farther and farther? I feel that I cannot vanish, since nothing
and that in this world there is truth."
that which can convince me, dear friend--life and death are what
convince. What convinces is when one sees a being dear to one, bound
to make it right" (Prince Andrew's voice trembled and he turned away),
exist.... Why? It cannot be that there is no answer. And I believe
"Yes, yes, of course," said Pierre, "isn't that what I'm saying?"
"No. All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of the
necessity of a future life, but this: when you go hand in hand with
looked in...."
"Well, that's it then! You know that there is a there and there is a
Someone? There is the future life. The Someone is--God."
Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage and horses had long
since been taken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed. The
sun had sunk half below the horizon and an evening frost was
the raft and talked.
"If there is a God and future life, there is truth and good, and
in the Whole," said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.
to Pierre, and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of
the sun gleaming on the blue waters. There was perfect stillness.
Pierre became silent. The raft had long since stopped and only the
waves of the current beat softly against it below. Prince Andrew
felt as if the sound of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre's words,
"It is true, believe it."
He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, childlike, tender look at
Pierre's face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before his
the sky to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since
Austerlitz saw that high, everlasting sky he had seen while lying on
something that was best within him, suddenly awoke, joyful and
youthful, in his soul. It vanished as soon as he returned to the
began a new life.
CHAPTER XIII
front entrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they approached the
commotion going on at the back porch. A woman, bent with age, with a
garment had rushed back to the gate on seeing the carriage driving up.
Two women ran out after them, and all four, looking round at the
"Those are Mary's 'God's folk,'" said Prince Andrew. "They have
mistaken us for my father. This is the one matter in which she
disobeys him. He orders these pilgrims to be driven away, but she
receives them."
"But what are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.
expected back soon.
The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any
minute.
Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments, which were always
he himself went to the nursery.
"Let us go and see my sister," he said to Pierre when he returned.
'God's folk.' It will serve her right, she will be confused, but you
"What are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.
"Come, and you'll see for yourself."
face when they went in. In her snug room, with lamps burning before
the icon stand, a young lad with a long nose and long hair, wearing
expression on her childlike face.
"Andrew, why didn't you warn me?" said the princess, with mild
reproach, as she stood before her pilgrims like a hen before her
chickens.
"Charmee de vous voir. Je suis tres contente de vous voir,"* she
said to Pierre as he kissed her hand. She had known him as a child,
and above all his kindly, simple face disposed her favorably toward
say, "I like you very much, but please don't laugh at my people."
"Ah, and Ivanushka is here too!" said Prince Andrew, glancing with a
smile at the young pilgrim.
"Andrew!" said Princess Mary, imploringly. "Il faut que vous sachiez
"Andrew, au nom de Dieu!"*[2] Princess Mary repeated.
intimite avec ce jeune homme."*
seriousness (for which Princess Mary was specially grateful to him)
into Ivanushka's face, who, seeing that she was being spoken about,
looked round at them all with crafty eyes.
Princess Mary's embarrassment on her people's account was quite
lowering her eyes but casting side glances at the newcomers, had
turned her cup upside down and placed a nibbled bit of sugar beside
"I have, good sir," she answered garrulously. "Just at Christmastime
great and wonderful blessing has been revealed."
"And was Ivanushka with you?"
bass voice. "I only came across Pelageya in Yukhnovo..."
what she had seen.
"In Kolyazin, master, a wonderful blessing has been revealed."
"Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary. "Don't tell him,
Pelageya."
"No... why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? I like him. He is kind, he
is one of God's chosen, he's a benefactor, he once gave me ten rubles,
I remember. When I was in Kiev, Crazy Cyril says to me (he's one of
All were silent, only the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones,
drawing in her breath.
"So I come, master, and the people say to me: 'A great blessing
Mother, the Holy Virgin Mother of God'...."
"All right, all right, you can tell us afterwards," said Princess
Mary, flushing.
"Let me ask her," said Pierre. "Did you see it yourselves?" he
inquired.
"Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy. Such a brightness on the
it drops and drops...."
turning to Princess Mary for support.
"They impose on the people," he repeated.
"Lord Jesus Christ!" exclaimed the pilgrim woman, crossing
herself. "Oh, don't speak so, master! There was a general who did
not believe, and said, 'The monks cheat,' and as soon as he'd said
Kiev catacombs came to him and said, 'Believe in me and I will make
real truth I'm telling you, I saw it myself. So he was brought,
quite blind, straight to her, and he goes up to her and falls down and
bestowed on me.' I saw it myself, master, the star is fixed into the
icon. Well, and what do you think? He received his sight! It's a sin
to speak so. God will punish you," she said admonishingly, turning
"How did the star get into the icon?" Pierre asked.
"And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of general?" said
Prince Andrew, with a smile.
Pelageya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands.
"Oh, master, master, what a sin! And you who have a son!" she began,
dear, what does it mean?..." she asked, turning to Princess Mary.
She got up and, almost crying, began to arrange her wallet. She
evidently felt frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a
house where such things could be said, and was at the same time
sorry to have now to forgo the charity of this house.
"Now, why need you do it?" said Princess Mary. "Why did you come
"Come, Pelageya, I was joking," said Pierre. "Princesse, ma
parole, je n'ai pas voulu l'offenser.* I did not mean anything, I
was only joking," he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface his
offense. "It was all my fault, and Andrew was only joking."
*"Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend her."
at her and now at Pierre, that she was gradually reassured.
CHAPTER XIV
long account of Father Amphilochus, who led so holy a life that his
some dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs with
the saints. "I'd pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then go on to
to come out, even into the light of heaven again."
Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room.
so well and have the greatest respect for them."
Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately.
last spring his wound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go away
for a cure. And I am also very much afraid for him spiritually. He has
not a character like us women who, when we suffer, can weep away our
sorrows. He keeps it all within him. Today he is cheerful and in
good spirits, but that is the effect of your visit--he is not often
like that. If you could persuade him to go abroad. He needs
Andrew and Pierre also went out into the porch.
"Who's that?" asked the old prince, noticing Pierre as he got out
of, the carriage.
"Ah! Very glad! Kiss me," he said, having learned who the young
The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre.
Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back to his father's study,
"Drain the blood from men's veins and put in water instead, then
there will be no more war! Old women's nonsense--old women's
nonsense!" he repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately on
evidently not wishing to join in the conversation, was looking over
the papers his father had brought from town. The old prince went up to
him and began to talk business.
"The marshal, a Count Rostov, hasn't sent half his contingent. He
came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner--I gave him a pretty
dinner!... And there, look at this.... Well, my boy," the old prince
rubbish yet stirs an old fellow up. Well, go! Get along! Perhaps
I'll come and sit with you at supper. We'll have another dispute. Make
Pierre, through the door.
Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize the
strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charm
was not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his
family and with the household. With the stern old prince and the
gentle, timid Princess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierre
Not only Princess Mary, who had been won by his gentleness with the
let himself be taken in his arms, and Michael Ivanovich and
Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him with pleasant smiles when he
talked to the old prince.
The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre's
together, they began to express their opinions of him as people always
do after a new acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one
said anything but what was good of him.
CHAPTER XV
uniform of his regiment, when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and
shouted to his master, "The count has come!" and Denisov, who had been
asleep on his bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace
experienced the same feeling his mother, his father, and his sister
speak. The regiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear and
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and
of peace, of moral support, and the same sense being at home here in
his own place, as he had felt under the parental roof. But here was
none of all that turmoil of the world at large, where he did not
with whom he ought, or ought not, to have an explanation; here was
no possibility of going there or not going there; here there were
whom not one was nearer to him or farther from him than another; there
the regiment, all was clear and simple. The whole world was divided
into two unequal parts: one, our Pavlograd regiment; the other, all
the rest. And the rest was no concern of his. In the regiment,
everything was definite: who was lieutenant, who captain, who was a
canteenkeeper gave one credit, one's pay came every four months, there
was nothing to think out or decide, you had only to do nothing that
was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and, when given an order,
to do what was clearly, distinctly, and definitely ordered--and all
would be well.
regimental life, Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on
lying down to rest. Life in the regiment, during this campaign, was
not forgive himself), he had made up his mind to atone for his fault
perfectly first-rate comrade and officer--in a word, a splendid man
possible in the regiment.
After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his
parents in five years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but now
Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles at
Pultusk and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It
campaign.
The Pavlograd regiment, belonging to that part of the army which had
served in the 1805 campaign, had been recruiting up to strength in
Russia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of
the campaign. It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau
and, when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the
campaign, was attached to Platov's division.
Platov's division was acting independently of the main army. Several
Oudinot's carriages. In April the Pavlograds were stationed
immovably for some weeks near a totally ruined and deserted German
village.
A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river
broke, and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisions
for the men nor fodder for the horses had been issued. As no
Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled--if
of taking anything from them, often gave them the last of their
rations.
The Pavlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action, but
had lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness. In the
hospitals, death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever, or
hardly able to drag their legs went to the front rather than to the
hospitals. When spring came on, the soldiers found a plant just
showing out of the ground that looked like asparagus, which, for
some reason, they called "Mashka's sweet root." It was very bitter,
but they wandered about the fields seeking it and dug it out with
it was a noxious plant. That spring a new disease broke
out among the soldiers, a swelling of the arms, legs, and face,
which the doctors attributed to eating this root. But in spite of
all this, the soldiers of Denisov's squadron fed chiefly on
and the last potatoes received had sprouted and frozen.
The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the
thatched roofs and had become terribly thin, though still covered with
thatched roofs in place of fodder, and sat down to dine round the
caldrons from which they rose up hungry, joking about their nasty food
and their hunger. As usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires,
sprouting rotten potatoes, told and listened to stories of
Potemkin's and Suvorov's campaigns, or to legends of Alesha the Sly,
or the priest's laborer Mikolka.
themselves as before, some playing cards (there was plenty of money,
though there was no food), some with more innocent games, such as
because there was a vague feeling that in the main it was going badly.
Rostov lived, as before, with Denisov, and since their furlough they
had become more friendly than ever. Denisov never spoke of Rostov's
family, but by the tender friendship his commander showed him,
Rostov felt that the elder hussar's luckless love for Natasha played a
part in strengthening their friendship. Denisov evidently tried to
greeted his safe return with evident joy. On one of his foraging
expeditions, in a deserted and ruined village to which he had come
in search of provisions, Rostov found a family consisting of an old
Pole and his daughter with an infant in arms. They were half clad,
hungry, too weak to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a
own lodging, and kept them for some weeks while the old man was
recovering. One of his comrades, talking of women, began chaffing
would not be a bad thing if he introduced to them the pretty Polish
girl he had saved. Rostov took the joke as an insult, flared up, and
said such unpleasant things to the officer that it was all Denisov
who did not himself know what Rostov's relations with the Polish
"Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I can't
tell you how it offended me... because... well, for that reason...."
Denisov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room
"Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostovs are!" he muttered, and Rostov
noticed tears in his eyes.
CHAPTER XVI
In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor's arrival,
but Rostov had no chance of being present at the review he held at
Bartenstein, as the Pavlograds were at the outposts far beyond that
place.
hut, dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and
into vogue. A trench was dug three and a half feet wide, four feet
eight inches deep, and eight feet long. At one end of the trench,
trench itself was the room, in which the lucky ones, such as the
squadron commander, had a board, lying on piles at the end opposite
earth was cut out to a breadth of about two and a half feet, and
that one could stand up in the middle of the trench and could even sit
up on the beds if one drew close to the table. Denisov, who was living
luxuriously because the soldiers of his squadron liked him, had also a
board in the roof at the farther end, with a piece of (broken but
mended) glass in it for a window. When it was very cold, embers from
steps in the "reception room"--as Denisov called that part of the hut-
and it was then so warm that the officers, of whom there were always
some with Denisov and Rostov, sat in their shirt sleeves.
changed his rain-soaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, got
warm, then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner,
head. He was pleasantly considering the probability of being
was awaiting Denisov, who had gone out somewhere and with whom he
wanted a talk.
Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the
hut, evidently much excited. Rostov moved to the window to see whom he
was shouting. "And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought some
him fuss and bustle now, my job's done and I'm lying down--capitally!"
Then Denisov's voice was heard shouting farther and farther away.
"Saddle! Second platoon!"
"Where are they off to now?" thought Rostov.
boots on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his things
about, took his leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again.
In answer to Rostov's inquiry where he was going, he answered
vaguely and crossly that he had some business.
"Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!" said Denisov
going out, and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashing
leave the hut till toward evening. Denisov had not yet returned. The
weather had cleared up, and near the next hut two officers and a cadet
were playing svayka, laughing as they threw their missiles which
of the game, the officers saw some wagons approaching with fifteen
hussars on their skinny horses behind them. The wagons escorted by the
surrounded them.
"There now, Denisov has been worrying," said Rostov, "and here are
the provisions."
"So they are!" said the officers. "Won't the soldiers be glad!"
infantry officers with whom he was talking.
"I warn you, Captain," one of the officers, a short thin man,
evidently very angry, was saying.
"You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny--seizing the
transport of one's own army. Our men have had nothing to eat for two
days."
"It is robbery! You'll answer for it, sir!" said the infantry
officer, raising his voice.
"Now, what are you pestewing me for?" cried Denisov, suddenly losing
his temper. "I shall answer for it and not you, and you'd better not
buzz about here till you get hurt. Be off! Go!" he shouted at the
officers.
"Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, undaunted and not
"Go to the devil! quick ma'ch, while you're safe and sound!" and
Denisov turned his horse on the officer.
"Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, threateningly, and
turning his horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle.
"A dog astwide a fence! A weal dog astwide a fence!" shouted Denisov
"After all, can't let our men starve."
The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an
infantry regiment, but learning from Lavrushka that the transport
was unescorted, Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force. The
soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even shared
The next day the regimental commander sent for Denisov, and
holding his fingers spread out before his eyes said:
"This is how I look at this affair: I know nothing about it and
and settle the business there in the commissariat department and if
possible sign a receipt for such and such stores received. If not,
row and the affair may end badly."
staff with a sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evening he
him in. Denisov could not speak and gasped for breath. When Rostov
asked what was the matter, he only uttered some incoherent oaths and
Alarmed at Denisov's condition, Rostov suggested that he should
undress, drink some water, and send for the doctor.
I'll always thwash scoundwels... and I'll tell the Empewo'...
Ice..." he muttered.
The regimental doctor, when he came, said it was absolutely
happened to him.
"I get there," began Denisov. "'Now then, where's your chief's
quarters?' They were pointed out. 'Please to wait.' 'I've widden
twenty miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait.
not done by man who seizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by him
silent?' 'Vewy good!' Then he says: 'Go and give a weceipt to the
commissioner, but your affair will be passed on to headquarters.' I go
to the commissioner. I enter, and at the table... who do you think?
No, but wait a bit!... Who is it that's starving us?" shouted Denisov,
about. "Telyanin! 'What? So it's you who's starving us to death! Is
it? Take this and this!' and I hit him so pat, stwaight on his
Well, I've had a bit of fun I can tell you!" cried Denisov, gleeful
and yet angry, his showing under his black mustache. "I'd have
killed him if they hadn't taken him away!"
"But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself," said Rostov. "You've
Denisov was bandaged up again and put to bed. Next day he woke
calm and cheerful.
The adjutant told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad
severity with which marauding and insubordination were now regarded,
degradation to the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for.
seizing the transports, Major Denisov, being drunk, went to the
chief quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief,
of one of them.
that he thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed
dared attack him he would give them an answer that they would not
him too well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at heart
he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which was
from the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denisov was ordered
the staff of his division to explain his violence at the
Cossack regiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denisov, as was his
wont, rode out in front of the outposts, parading his courage. A
excuse himself from appearing at the staff and went into hospital.
the progress of his affairs, took advantage of the armistice to get
leave to visit Denisov in hospital.
The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice
it is so beautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a
particularly dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its
foul streets, tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken
soldiers wandering about.
frames and panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a
soldiers, with pale swollen faces, were sitting or walking about in
the sunshine in the yard.
Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of
putrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian army
doctor smoking a cigar. The doctor was followed by a Russian
assistant.
"I can't tear myself to pieces," the doctor was saying. "Come to
Makar Alexeevich in the evening. I shall be there."
The assistant asked some further questions.
Rostov coming upstairs.
pesthouse, sir."
"How so?" asked Rostov.
"Typhus, sir. It's death to go in. Only we two, Makeev and I" (he
pointed to the assistant), "keep on here. Some five of us doctors have
died in this place.... When a new one comes he is done for in a week,"
invited here, but our allies don't like it at all."
Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars,
well that the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of
"Four hundred, sir, and they're always sending me fresh ones. There
impatient for the talkative doctor to go.
"Major Denisov," Rostov said again. "He was wounded at Molliten."
"Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makeev?" queried the doctor, in a tone of
indifference.
The assistant, however, did not confirm the doctor's words.
Rostov described Denisov's appearance.
is dead, I fancy. However, I'll look up our list. We had a list.
Have you got it, Makeev?"
"Makar Alexeevich has the list," answered the assistant. "But if
you'll step into the officers' wards you'll see for yourself," he
added, turning to Rostov.
But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the
assistant to show him the way.
Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smell
was so strong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and
collect his strength before he could go on. A door opened to the
right, and an emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in
underclothing, limped out and, leaning against the doorpost, looked
the door, Rostov saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floor
But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in,
Rostov entered the soldiers' ward. The foul air, to which he had
the walls, and leaving a passage in the middle. Most of them were
the room and looking through the open doors into the two adjoining
around. He had not at all expected such a sight. Just before him,
listened and made out the word. It was "drink, drink, a drink!" Rostov
glanced round, looking for someone who would put this man back in
his place and bring him water.
Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from
"Good day, your honor!" he shouted, rolling his eyes at Rostov and
evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities.
"Get him to his place and give him some water," said Rostov,
"Yes, your honor," the soldier replied complacently, and rolling his
eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter, but did not
move.
"No, it's impossible to do anything here," thought Rostov,
intense look fixed on him on his right, and he turned. Close to the
corner, on an overcoat, sat an old, unshaven, gray-bearded soldier
as thin as a skeleton, with a stern sallow face and eyes intently
fixed on Rostov. The man's neighbor on one side whispered something to
him, pointing at Rostov, who noticed that the old man wanted to
neighbor on the other side, who lay motionless some distance from
him with his head thrown back, was a young soldier with a snub nose.
His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were rolled
back. Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran down his
his jaw quivering. "He's been dead since morning. After all we're men,
not dogs."
once," said the assistant hurriedly. "Let us go, your honor."
"Yes, yes, let us go," said Rostov hastily, and lowering his eyes
and shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of
reproachful envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of the
room.
CHAPTER XVIII
Going along the corridor, the assistant led Rostov to the
hospital dressing gowns. The first person Rostov met in the
about the first room in a nightcap and hospital dressing gown, with
don't you remember, who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern? And I've had
empty sleeve of his dressing gown. "Looking for Vasili Dmitrich
Denisov? My neighbor," he added, when he heard who Rostov wanted.
"Here, here," and Tushin led him into the next room, from whence
came sounds of several laughing voices.
"How can they laugh, or even live at all here?" thought Rostov,
in the soldiers' ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those
envious looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face
Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket,
though it was nearly noon.
"Ah, Wostov? How are you, how are you?" he called out, still in
the same voice as in the regiment, but Rostov noticed sadly that under
this habitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden feeling
intonations of his voice.
His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, six
the faces of the other hospital patients, but it was not this that
struck Rostov. What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to
see him, and smiled at him unnaturally. He did not ask about the
spoke of these matters did not listen.
outside the hospital. He seemed to try to forget that old life and was
Rostov's inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at once produced
began reading his paper and specially drew Rostov's attention to the
stinging rejoinders he made to his enemies. His hospital companions,
who had gathered round Rostov--a fresh arrival from the world outside-
man who had the next bed, a stout Uhlan, continued to sit on his
bed, gloomily frowning and smoking a pipe, and little one-armed Tushin
still listened, shaking his head disapprovingly. In the middle of
the reading, the Uhlan interrupted Denisov.
"But what I say is," he said, turning to Rostov, "it would be best
now be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted...."
"Me petition the Empewo'!" exclaimed Denisov, in a voice to which he
an expression of irritable impotence. "What for? If I were a wobber
wobbers to book. Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid of anyone. I've
served the Tsar and my countwy honowably and have not stolen! And am I
to be degwaded?... Listen, I'm w'iting to them stwaight. This is
what I say: 'If I had wobbed the Tweasuwy...'"
"It's certainly well written," said Tushin, "but that's not the
point, Vasili Dmitrich," and he also turned to Rostov. "One has to
submit, and Vasili Dmitrich doesn't want to. You know the auditor told
you it was a bad business."
"Well, let it be bad," said Denisov.
"The auditor wrote out a petition for you," continued Tushin, "and
(indicating Rostov) "has connections on the staff. You won't find a
went on reading his paper.
Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov, though he
officers was the safest, and though he would have been glad to be of
hasty temper.
an hour, was over, Rostov said nothing, and he spent the rest of the
stories. Denisov was moodily silent all the evening.
Late in the evening, when Rostov was about to leave, he asked
"Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, glancing round at the officers, and
said, coming from the window and giving Rostov a large envelope. In it
Denisov, without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat
officials, simply asked for pardon.
"Hand it in. It seems..."
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state
of Denisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the
Emperor.
On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in
he was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the
stay at Tilsit.
"I should like to see the great man," he said, alluding to Napoleon,
"You are speaking of Buonaparte?" asked the general, smiling.
Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that
"I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon," he replied. The
"You will go far," he said, and took him to Tilsit with him.
Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two
river, saw the pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in
arrival, saw both Emperors get into boats, and saw how Napoleon-
reaching the raft first--stepped quickly forward to meet Alexander and
Since he had begun to move in the highest circles Boris had made it
those who had come with Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore, and
interview had lasted an hour and fifty-three minutes. He noted this
down that same evening, among other facts he felt to be of historic
matter of great importance, for a man who valued his success in the
two Emperors, and having succeeded in this, Boris felt that henceforth
people had grown accustomed to him and accepted him. Twice he had
his face, and all those at court, far from cold-shouldering him as
at first when they considered him a newcomer, would now have been
surprised had he been absent.
Boris lodged with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilinski.
Zhilinski, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, and passionately fond
of the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, French
On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilinski
arranged a supper for his French friends. The guest of honor was an
aide-de-camp of Napoleon's, there were also several French officers of
aristocratic French family. That same day, Rostov, profiting by the
darkness to avoid being recognized in civilian dress, came to Tilsit
and went to the lodging occupied by Boris and Zhilinski.
from having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and
Cossack officers, Rostov had argued that if Napoleon were taken
Quite lately, happening to meet a wounded French colonel on the
between a legitimate sovereign and the criminal Bonaparte. Rostov
was therefore unpleasantly struck by the presence of French officers
As soon as he noticed a French officer, who thrust his head out of the
Boris, hearing a strange voice in the anteroom, came out to meet
him. An expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face
on first recognizing Rostov.
"Ah, it's you? Very glad, very glad to see you," he said, however,
coming toward him with a smile. But Rostov had noticed his first
impulse.
"I've come at a bad time I think. I should not have come, but I have
business," he said coldly.
"No, I only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment.
Dans un moment je suis a vous,"* he said, answering someone who called
him.
"I see I'm intruding," Rostov repeated.
The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris' face:
took both Rostov's hands and led him into the next room. His eyes,
something, as if screened by blue spectacles of conventionality. So it
seemed to Rostov.
"Oh, come now! As if you could come at a wrong time!" said Boris,
but an hussar officer, and an old friend of his.
"Count Zhilinski--le Comte N. N.--le Capitaine S. S.," said he,
reluctantly, and remained silent.
appear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with the
Frenchmen, with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen,
Rostov had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the look
of dissatisfaction on Boris' face, and as always happens to those in a
and that he was in everybody's way. He really was in their way, for he
alone took no part in the conversation which again became general. The
sitting here for?" He rose and went up to Boris.
"Anyhow, I'm in your way," he said in a low tone. "Come and talk
"Oh, no, not at all," said Boris. "But if you are tired, come and
lie down in my room and have a rest."
"Yes, really..."
They went into the little room where Boris slept. Rostov, without
sitting down, began at once, irritably (as if Boris were to blame in
some way) telling him about Denisov's affair, asking him whether,
through his general, he could and would intercede with the Emperor
and Boris were alone, Rostov felt for the first time that he could not
leg crossed over the other and stroking his left hand with the slender
happened Rostov felt uncomfortable and cast down his eyes.
general, I think..."
"So you don't want to do anything? Well then, say so!" Rostov almost
shouted, not looking Boris in the face.
Boris smiled.
"On the contrary, I will do what I can. Only I thought..."
At that moment Zhilinski's voice was heard calling Boris.
"Well then, go, go, go..." said Rostov, and refusing supper and
CHAPTER XX
as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do so,
and Boris, even had he wished to, could not have done so on the
Cross of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of
the First Degree, and a dinner had been arranged for the evening,
given by a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhensk
the latter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, and
clothes and a round hat, he wandered about the town, staring at the
French and their uniforms and at the streets and houses where the
being set up and preparations made for the dinner; he saw the
"Boris doesn't want to help me and I don't want to ask him. That's
settled," thought Nicholas. "All is over between us, but I won't leave
without getting his letter to the Emperor. The Emperor!... He is
Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite were
assembling, evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out.
arrest me for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understand
on whose side justice lies. He understands everything, knows
if they did arrest me for being here, what would it matter?" thought
he, looking at an officer who was entering the house the Emperor
of the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought. "I will fall
at his feet and beseech him. He will lift me up, will listen, and will
even thank me. 'I am happy when I can do good, but to remedy injustice
is the greatest happiness,'" Rostov fancied the sovereign saying.
And passing people who looked after him with curiosity, he entered the
he saw a closed door. Below, under the staircase, was a door leading
"To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty," said Nicholas,
with a tremor in his voice.
On hearing this indifferent voice, Rostov grew frightened at what he
was doing; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was so
fascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run
Rostov entered.
A short stout man of about thirty, in white breeches and high
speaking to someone in the adjoining room.
"A good figure and in her first bloom," he was saying, but on seeing
Rostov, he stopped short and frowned.
"What is it? A petition?"
"What is it?" asked the person in the other room.
"Tell him to come later. He'll be coming out directly, we must go."
"Later... later! Tomorrow. It's too late..."
Rostov turned and was about to go, but the man in the braces stopped
"Whom have you come from? Who are you?"
"I come from Major Denisov," answered Rostov.
"Are you an officer?"
"Lieutenant Count Rostov."
you... go," and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed
were many officers and generals in full parade uniform, whom he had to
pass.
himself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and being put to
shame and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to the impropriety
making his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a
familiar voice called him and a hand detained him.
voice.
It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor's special
favor during this campaign, and who had formerly commanded the
division in which Rostov was serving.
Rostov, in dismay, began justifying himself, but seeing the
kindly, jocular face of the general, he took him aside and in an
excited voice told him the whole affair, asking him to intercede for
Denisov's case, when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were
heard on the stairs, and the general, leaving him, went to the
went to their horses. Hayne, the same groom who had been at
footstep Rostov knew at once was heard on the stairs. Forgetting the
danger of being recognized, Rostov went close to the porch, together
with some inquisitive civilians, and again, after two years, saw those
features he adored: that same face and same look and step, and the
chamois-leather breeches and high boots--and wearing a star Rostov did
not know (it was that of the Legion d'honneur), the monarch came out
his glance. He spoke a few words to some of the generals, and,
recognizing the former commander of Rostov's division, smiled and
All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the general talking for
some time to the Emperor.
The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his
horse. Again the crowd of members of the suite and street gazers
his horse, with his hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the
cavalry general and said in a loud voice, evidently wishing to be
"I cannot do it, General. I cannot, because the law is stronger than
I," and he raised his foot to the stirrup.
Rostov ran after him with the crowd.
CHAPTER XXI
battalion of the Preobrazhensk regiment stood on the right and a
battalion of the French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left.
As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, which
opposite flank, and at the head of them Rostov recognized Napoleon. It
could be no one else. He came at a gallop, wearing a small hat, a blue
shoulder. He was riding a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse
with a crimson gold-embroidered saddlecloth. On approaching
"Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon said something to Alexander, and both
Emperors dismounted and took each other's hands. Napoleon's face
wore an unpleasant and artificial smile. Alexander was saying
In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes' horses, which
were pushing back the crowd, Rostov kept his eyes on every movement of
Alexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as a surprise that Alexander
treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease
with the Tsar, as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday
matter to him.
Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites,
approached the right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came
straight up to the crowd standing there. The crowd unexpectedly
found itself so close to the Emperors that Rostov, standing in the
front row, was afraid he might be recognized.
"Sire, I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to the
This was said by the undersized Napoleon, looking up straight into
Alexander's eyes. Alexander listened attentively to what was said to
him and, bending his head, smiled pleasantly.
"To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war,"
added Napoleon, accentuating each syllable, as with a composure and
assurance exasperating to Rostov, he ran his eyes over the Russian
fixed on their Emperor.
Alexander and took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski, the
commander of the battalion.
Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand,
tore it in doing so, and threw it away. An aide-de-camp behind him
"To whom shall it be given?" the Emperor Alexander asked
"But we must give him an answer."
Kozlovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostov in his
"Can it be me?" thought Rostov.
first soldier in the rank, stepped briskly forward.
"Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices whispered to Lazarev who
did not know where to go. Lazarev stopped, casting a sidelong look
at his colonel in alarm. His face twitched, as often happens to
soldiers called before the ranks.
behind him as if to take something. The members of his suite, guessing
something from one to another, and a page--the same one Rostov had
seen the previous evening at Boris'--ran forward and, bowing
respectfully over the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting a
moment, laid in it an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, without
looking, pressed two fingers together and the badge was between
them. Then he approached Lazarev (who rolled his eyes and persistently
and the small white hand holding the Order touched one of Lazarev's
buttons. It was as if Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his
hand to deign to touch that soldier's breast for the soldier to be
forever happy, rewarded, and distinguished from everyone else in the
world. Napoleon merely laid the cross on Lazarev's breast and,
cross would adhere there. And it really did.
man with white hands who was doing something to him and, still
Alexander's eyes, as if asking whether he should stand there, or go
away, or do something else. But receiving no orders, he remained for
some time in that rigid position.
The Emperors remounted and rode away. The Preobrazhensk battalion,
tables prepared for them.
Lazarev sat in the place of honor. Russian and French officers
embraced him, congratulated him, and pressed his hands. Crowds of
officers and civilians drew near merely to see him. A rumble of
in the square. Two officers with flushed faces, looking cheerful and
was saying. "Have you seen Lazarev?"
"I have."
"Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner."
"Yes, but what luck for Lazarev! Twelve hundred francs' pension
for life."
"Here's a cap, lads!" shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier, donning a
"It's a fine thing! First-rate!"
"Have you heard the password?" asked one Guards' officer of another.
"The day before yesterday it was 'Napoleon, France, bravoure';
yesterday, 'Alexandre, Russie, grandeur.' One day our Emperor gives it
and next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George's
Cross to the bravest of the French Guards. It has to be done. He
must respond in kind."
banquet. On his way back, he noticed Rostov standing by the corner
of a house.
"Rostov! How d'you do? We missed one another," he said, and could
"You'll call round?"
submission, and the whole hospital, with arms and legs torn off and
he thought of that self-satisfied Bonaparte, with his small white
why those severed arms and legs and those dead men?... Then again he
thought of Lazarev rewarded and Denisov punished and unpardoned. He
The smell of the food the Preobrazhenskis were eating and a sense of
hunger recalled him from these reflections; he had to get something to
himself, had come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty in
getting a dinner. Two officers of his own division joined him. The
conversation naturally turned on the peace. The officers, his
concluded after the battle of Friedland. They said that had we held
out a little longer Napoleon would have been done for, as his troops
had neither provisions nor ammunition. Nicholas ate and drank (chiefly
the latter) in silence. He finished a couple of bottles of wine by
himself. The process in his mind went on tormenting him without
reaching a conclusion. He feared to give way to his thoughts, yet
could not get rid of them. Suddenly, on one of the officers' saying
that it was humiliating to look at the French, Rostov began shouting
officers:
rushing to his face. "How can you judge the Emperor's actions? What
justifying himself, and unable to understand Rostov's outburst, except
But Rostov did not listen to him.
he went on. "If we are ordered to die, we must die. If we're punished,
Emperor pleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude an
alliance with him, it means that that is the right thing to do. If
will be left! That way we shall be saying there is no God--nothing!"
seemed to his listeners, but quite relevantly to the course of his own
thoughts.
"Yes, and to drink," assented Nicholas. "Hullo there! Another
bottle!" he shouted.
with the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburg
there was much talk of the grandeur of this important meeting.
CHAPTER XXII
In 1809 the intimacy between "the world's two arbiters," as Napoleon
and Alexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared war on
in court circles the possibility of marriage between Napoleon and
keenly directed on the internal changes that were being undertaken
in all the departments of government.
Life meanwhile--real life, with its essential interests of health
political friendship or enmity with Napoleon Bonaparte and from all
the schemes of reconstruction.
BOOK SIX: 1808 --10
Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.
All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates--and constantly
difficulty.
He had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which Pierre
lacked, and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going.
On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liberated and
became free agricultural laborers--this being one of the first
examples of the kind in Russia. On other estates the serfs' compulsory
labor was commuted for a quitrent. A trained midwife was engaged for
Bogucharovo at his expense, and a priest was paid to teach reading and
writing to the children of the peasants and household serfs.
and his son, who was still in the care of nurses. The other half he
spent in "Bogucharovo Cloister," as his father called Prince
world he had expressed to Pierre, he diligently followed all that went
on, received many books, and to his surprise noticed that when he or
his father had visitors from Petersburg, the very vortex of life,
these people lagged behind himself--who never left the country--in
knowledge of what was happening in home and foreign affairs.
critical of survey our last two unfortunate campaigns, and with
new grass, the first leaves on the birches, and the first puffs of
white spring clouds floating across the clear blue sky. He was not
thinking of anything, but looked absent-mindedly and cheerfully from
side to side.
They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the year
before. They went through the muddy village, past threshing floors and
the bridge, uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, past
strips of stubble land and bushes touched with green here and there,
forest it was almost hot, no wind could be felt. The birches with
their sticky green leaves were motionless, and lilac-colored flowers
year's leaves. The coarse evergreen color of the small fir trees
reminder of winter. On entering the forest the horses began to snort
and sweated visibly.
Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman; the latter
assented. But apparently the coachman's sympathy was not enough for
Peter, and he turned on the box toward his master.
"What?"
"What is he talking about?" thought Prince Andrew. "Oh, the
spring, I suppose," he thought as he turned round. "Yes, really
everything is green already.... How early! The birches and cherry
here is one oak!"
great as a man could embrace, and evidently long ago some of its
branches had been broken off and its bark scarred. With its huge
ungainly limbs sprawling unsymmetrically, and its gnarled hands and
in the forest, and this oak, refused to yield to the charm of spring
or notice either the spring or the sunshine.
"Spring, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to say. "Are you not
the same and always a fraud? There is no spring, no sun, no happiness!
sticking out my broken and barked fingers just where they have
grown, whether from my back or my sides: as they have grown so I
stand, and I do not believe in your hopes and your lies."
to look at that oak, as if expecting something from it. Under the oak,
too, were flowers and grass, but it stood among them scowling,
rigid, misshapen, and grim as ever.
"Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right," thought Prince
Andrew. "Let others--the young--yield afresh to that fraud, but we
know life, our life is finished!"
journey he, as it were, considered his life afresh and arrived at
anything.
CHAPTER II
Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the
which he was trustee. This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov, and in the
middle of May Prince Andrew went to visit him.
It was now hot spring weather. The whole forest was already
clothed in green. It was dusty and so hot that on passing near water
Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied with the business about
which he had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in the
cross the path of his caleche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran
a dark-haired, remarkably slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintz
dress, with a white handkerchief on her head from under which loose
locks of hair escaped. The girl was shouting something but, seeing
that he was a stranger, ran back laughing without looking at him.
Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. The day was so
beautiful, the sun so bright, everything around so gay, but that
slim pretty girl did not know, or wish to know, of his existence and
was contented and cheerful in her own separate--probably foolish-
but bright and happy life. "What is she so glad about? What is she
In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was living at Otradnoe just as he had done
with hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He was glad to see Prince
During the dull day, in the course of which he was entertained by
his elderly hosts and by the more important of the visitors (the old
count's house was crowded on account of an approaching name day),
the younger members of the company, and asked himself each time, "What
is she thinking about? Why is she so glad?"
That night, alone in new surroundings, he was long unable to
sleep. He read awhile and then put out his candle, but relit it. It
was cross with the stupid old man (as he called Rostov), who had
made him stay by assuring him that some necessary documents had not
He got up and went to the window to open it. As soon as he opened
the shutters the moonlight, as if it had long been watching for
this, burst into the room. He opened the casement. The night was
pollard trees, looking black on one side and with a silvery light on
vegetation with silver-lit leaves and stems here and there. Farther
back beyond the dark trees a roof glittered with dew, to the right was
a leafy tree with brilliantly white trunk and branches, and above it
recognized at once.
"But when are you coming to bed?" replied another voice.
rustle of her dress and even her breathing could be heard.
Everything was stone-still, like the moon and its light and the
unintentional presence.
Sonya!" she said almost with tears in her voice. "There never, never
was such a lovely night before!"
"Do just come and see what a moon!... Oh, how lovely! Come
here.... Darling, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel like
sitting down on my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this,
He heard the sound of a scuffle and Sonya's disapproving voice:
"It's past one o'clock."
"Oh, you only spoil things for me. All right, go, go!"
Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sitting
there. From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh.
"For her I might as well not exist!" thought Prince Andrew while
he listened to her voice, for some reason expecting yet fearing that
she might say something about him. "There she is again! As if it
were on purpose," thought he.
In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil of
youthful thoughts and hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of his
Next morning, having taken leave of no one but the count, and not
It was already the beginning of June when on his return journey he
harness bells sounded yet more muffled than they had done six weeks
before, for now all was thick, shady, and dense, and the young firs
dotted about in the forest did not jar on the general beauty but,
lending themselves to the mood around, were delicately green with
fluffy young shoots.
The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm was gathering, but
only a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly, sprinkling
the road and the sappy leaves. The left side of the forest was dark in
the shade, the right side glittered in the sunlight, wet and shiny and
nightingales trilled, and their voices reverberated now near, now
far away.
"Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed," thought
Prince Andrew. "But where is it?" he again wondered, gazing at the
spreading out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage, stood rapt and
fingers nor old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in
evidence now. Through the hard century-old bark, even where there were
no twigs, leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old
veteran could have produced.
was seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal.
All the best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory.
Austerlitz with the lofty heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face,
Pierre at the ferry, that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night,
and that night itself and the moon, and.... all this rushed suddenly
to his mind.
finally and decisively. "It is not enough for me to know what I have
in me--everyone must know it: Pierre, and that young girl who wanted
not be lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it,
but so that it may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live
in harmony!"
On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that
autumn and found all sorts of reasons for this decision. A whole
essential for him to go to Petersburg, and even to re-enter the
how he could ever even have doubted the necessity of taking an
the idea of leaving the quiet country could ever enter his head. It
now seemed clear to him that all his experience of life must be
senselessly wasted unless he applied it to some kind of work and again
formerly, on the strength of similar wretched logical arguments, it
had seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself if he now, after
the lessons he had had in life, allowed himself to believe in the
possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness or
Ryazan he found the country dull; his former pursuits no longer
interested him, and often when sitting alone in his study he got up,
a la grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame.
She did not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked
simply, merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossing
his arms behind him, long paced the room, now frowning, now smiling,
as he reflected on those irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as
Pierre, with fame, with the girl at the window, the oak, and woman's
beauty and love. And if anyone came into his room at such moments he
was particularly cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical.
"My dear," Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say,
"little Nicholas can't go out today, it's very cold."
who needs fresh air should remain at home," he would add with
emotions that stirred within him.
At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work
dries men up.
when the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and his
leg, and remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speranski every
introducing examinations to qualify for the grades of Collegiate
Russia: legal, administrative, and financial, from the Council of
State down to the district tribunals. Now those vague liberal dreams
with which the Emperor Alexander had ascended the throne, and which he
had tried to put into effect with the aid of his associates,
Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Kochubey, and Strogonov--whom he himself
being realized.
Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side,
and Arakcheev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew,
as a gentleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a
a single word. It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he
was antipathetic to the Emperor and that the latter disliked his
Majesty's displeasure at Bolkonski's not having served since 1805.
antipathies," thought Prince Andrew, "so it will not do to present
my proposal for the reform of the army regulations to the Emperor
personally, but the project will speak for itself."
days later Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see
On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev's waiting
He did not know Arakcheev personally, had never seen him, and all he
had heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man.
"He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need not
commissioned to consider my project, so he alone can get it
During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen
the anterooms of many important men, and the different types of such
rooms were well known to him. Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite a
special character. The faces of the unimportant people awaiting
their turn for an audience showed embarrassment and servility; the
faces of those of higher rank expressed a common feeling of
awkwardness, covered by a mask of unconcern and ridicule of
laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname "Sila Andreevich" and the
words, "Uncle will give it to us hot," in reference to Count
Arakcheev. One general (an important personage), evidently feeling
offended at having to wait so long, sat crossing and uncrossing his
legs and smiling contemptuously to himself.
faces--that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the
adjutant on duty to take in his name, but received an ironical look
and was told that his turn would come in due course. After some others
had been shown in and out of the minister's room by the adjutant on
frightened air was admitted at that terrible door. This officer's
audience lasted a long time. Then suddenly the grating sound of a
officer--with pale face and trembling lips--came out and passed
through the waiting room, clutching his head.
on duty said in a whisper, "To the right, at the window."
Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man
wrinkles, scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and an
overhanging red nose. Arakcheev turned his head toward him without
looking at him.
"What is your petition?" asked Arakcheev.
"I am not petitioning, your excellency," returned Prince Andrew
quietly.
"Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolkonski?"
"I am not petitioning about anything. His Majesty the Emperor has
"You see, my dear sir, I have read your project," interrupted
without looking at Prince Andrew--relapsing gradually into a tone of
excellency how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have
presented," said Prince Andrew politely.
the committee. I do not approve of it," said Arakcheev, rising and
taking a paper from his writing table. "Here!" and he handed it to
misspelled, and without punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed because
"To the Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended that
your honor should be appointed a member, but without a salary."
"I don't want one."
honor... Eh! Call the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowing
to Prince Andrew.
committee Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances,
particularly those he knew to be in power and whose aid he might need.
In Petersburg he now experienced the same feeling he had had on the
attracted to the ruling circles where the future, on which the fate of
older men, the curiosity of the uninitiated, the reserve of the
initiated, the hurry and preoccupation of everyone, and the
every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in Petersburg a vast
a mysterious person he did not know, but who was supposed to be a
man of genius--Speranski. And this movement of reconstruction of which
Prince Andrew had a vague idea, and Speranski its chief promoter,
Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception
because he was reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondly
because by liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of
the innovations, turned to him expecting his sympathy in their
disapproval of the reforms, simply because he was the son of his
halo of romance on account of his supposed death and the tragic loss
of his wife. Besides this the general opinion of all who had known him
previously was that he had greatly improved during these last five
years, having softened and grown more manly, lost his former
affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony, and acquired the
interested in him, and wanted to meet him.
The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrew
spent the evening at Count Kochubey's. He told the count of his
interview with Sila Andreevich (Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that
nickname with the same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the
Minister of War's anteroom).
"Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michael
Mikhaylovich Speranski. He manages everything. I'll speak to him. He
has promised to come this evening."
"What has Speranski to do with the army regulations?" asked Prince
Andrew.
Kochubey shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkonski's
simplicity.
"We were talking to him about you a few days ago," Kochubey
"Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?" said an old
man of Catherine's day, turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski.
Andrew, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old
"Afraid of being late..." said the old man, looking at Kochubey.
the land if they are set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficult
heads of the departments when everybody has to pass examinations?"
crossing his legs and glancing round.
"Well, I have Pryanichnikov serving under me, a splendid man, a
priceless man, but he's sixty. Is he to go up for examination?"
"Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all general,
but..."
large open forehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness,
a cross suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast. It
was Speranski. Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a
throb within him, as happens at critical moments of life. Whether it
was from respect, envy, or anticipation, he did not know.
Speranski's whole figure was of a peculiar type that made him easily
such calmness and self-assurance; he had never seen so resolute yet
gentle an expression as that in those half-closed, rather humid
eyes, or so firm a smile that expressed nothing; nor had he heard such
a refined, smooth, soft voice; above all he had never seen such
very plump, soft, and white. Such whiteness and softness Prince Andrew
had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long in
hospital. This was Speranski, Secretary of State, reporter to the
Emperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he had more than once met
and talked with Napoleon.
people involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no
conversing.
particular attention. As happens to some people, especially to men who
judge those near to them severely, he always on meeting anyone new-
especially anyone whom, like Speranski, he knew by reputation-
sooner as he had been detained at the palace. He did not say that
of modesty. When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew, Speranski slowly
him in silence.
"I am very glad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of you, as
everyone has," he said after a pause.
Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had given
Bolkonski. Speranski smiled more markedly.
"The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend
Monsieur Magnitski," he said, fully articulating every word and
syllable, "and if you like I can put you in touch with him." He paused
at the full stop. "I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to
co-operate in promoting all that is reasonable."
A circle soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talked
about his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.
movement of Speranski's: this man, not long since an insignificant
divinity student, who now, Bolkonski thought, held in his hands--those
plump white hands--the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the
extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered the
immeasurable height. When the old man began to speak too loud,
Speranski smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or
disadvantage of what pleased the sovereign.
Having talked for a little while in the general circle, Speranski
rose and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of
the room. It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest
himself in Bolkonski.
conversation in which that venerable gentleman involved me," he said
with a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimating by that smile
desirable that there should be more imitators; and secondly because
you are one of those gentlemen of the chamber who have not
considered themselves offended by the new decree concerning the
ranks allotted to courtiers, which is causing so much gossip and
tittle-tattle."
"No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did not wish me to take
"Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above
"I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground,"
returned Prince Andrew, trying to resist Speranski's influence, of
which he began to be conscious. He did not like to agree with him in
easily and well, he felt a difficulty in expressing himself now
while talking with Speranski. He was too much absorbed in observing
the famous man's personality.
idea that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me parait
incontestable. Certains droits et privileges de la noblesse me
paraissent etre des moyens de soutenir ce sentiment."*
*"The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me incontestable.
of maintaining that sentiment."
The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was much
improved by the change. Probably Prince Andrew's thought interested
him.
"Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue,"* he began,
than in Russian but quite calmly.
*"If you regard the question from that point of view."
privileges harmful to the service; that honor, l'honneur, is either
a negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a
similar to the Legion d'honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, not
harmful but helpful to the success of the service, but not a class
or court privilege."
"I do not dispute that, but it cannot be denied that court
privileges have attained the same end," returned Prince Andrew. "Every
courtier considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily."
"Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege, Prince,"
said Speranski, indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably
do me the honor of calling on me on Wednesday," he added, "I will,
after talking with Magnitski, let you know what may interest you,
and shall also have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you."
Closing his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without taking leave, and
CHAPTER VI
During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew
felt the whole trend of thought he had formed during his life of
everywhere, absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He did
nothing, did not even think or find time to think, but only talked,
for whole days together that he had no time to notice that he was
thinking of nothing.
and confidentially.
To Bolkonski so many people appeared contemptible and
insignificant creatures, and he so longed to find in someone the
living ideal of that perfection toward which he strove, that he
perfectly rational and virtuous man. Had Speranski sprung from the
unheroic sides; but as it was, Speranski's strange and logical turn of
mind inspired him with respect all the more because he did not quite
his side, showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness before
hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumption
that one's companion is the only man besides oneself capable of
reasonableness and profundity of one's own ideas.
wolves to be fed and the sheep to be safe..." or: "They cannot
understand this..." and all in a way that seemed to say: "We, you
This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in
intellect who by his energy and persistence had attained power,
be--one who explained all the facts of life reasonably, considered
important only what was rational, and was capable of applying the
standard of reason to everything. Everything seemed so simple and
everything was as it should be: only one thing disconcerted Prince
allow one to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands,
which Prince Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the
hands of those who possess power. This mirrorlike gaze and those
unpleasantly struck, too, by the excessive contempt for others that he
observed in Speranski, and by the diversity of lines of argument he
practical man and condemn dreamers; now that of a satirist, and
laugh ironically at his opponents; now grow severely logical, or
suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics. (This last resource was one
he very frequently employed.) He would transfer a question to
thought, and, having deduced the refutation he needed, would again
In general the trait of Speranski's mentality which struck Prince
Andrew most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and
after all impossible to express all one thinks; and that he had
never felt the doubt, "Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" And
attracted Prince Andrew.
During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt a
for Bonaparte. The fact that Speranski was the son of a village
cherish his sentiment for him the more, and unconsciously to
On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him, having mentioned the
sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and
fifty years, had cost millions, and had done nothing except that
"And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent,"
said he. "We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we have
Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in
jurisprudence was needed which he did not possess.
"But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a vicious
A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army
Speranski's request he took the first part of the Civil Code that
was being drawn up and, with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the
Personal Rights.
CHAPTER VII
Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning to
himself in a leading position among the Petersburg Freemasons. He
arranged dining and funeral lodge meetings, enrolled new members,
and busied himself uniting various lodges and acquiring authentic
majority of members were stingy and irregular. He supported almost
His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations
and dissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and though he
of the bachelor circles in which he moved.
Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, however, Pierre
rest upon it, the more Masonic ground on which he stood gave way under
him. At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under
him the closer bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he had
joined the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who
foot down it sank in. To make quite sure of the firmness the ground,
he put his other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in
it, and involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.
Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg--he had of late stood
aside from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and lived almost
entirely in Moscow. All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew
as Brothers in Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D.,
which they aimed in ordinary life. Often after collecting alms, and
reckoning up twenty to thirty rubles received for the most part in
lodges or in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the
designation of God, the three primordial elements--sulphur, mercury,
which the elder ones chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought,
heart was not in the mystical aspect of Freemasonry.
In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like
him, seeking and vacillating, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a
In the third category he included those Brothers (the majority)
who saw nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and
ceremonies, and prized the strict performance of these forms without
Finally, to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged,
Pierre's observations were men who had no belief in anything, nor
with the wealthy young Brothers who were influential through their
Freemasonry, at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him
based merely on externals. He did not think of doubting Freemasonry
and deviated from its original principles. And so toward the end of
order.
Freemasons knew from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov
had obtained the confidence of many highly placed persons, had been
initiated into many mysteries, had been raised to a higher grade,
and was bringing back with him much that might conduce to the
all came to see him, tried to ingratiate themselves with him, and it
concealing it.
order. The meeting was a full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierre
speech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries
in the seclusion of our lodge--we must act--act! We are drowsing,
but we must act." Pierre raised his notebook and began to read.
"For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph of
virtue," he read, "we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse
principles in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake the
education of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the
unity of purpose and possessed of authority and power.
"To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over
vice and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in this
world, receive a lasting reward for his virtue. But in these great
endeavors we are gravely hampered by the political institutions of
today. What is to be done in these circumstances? To favor
revolutions, overthrow everything, repel force by force?... No! We are
very far from that. Every violent reform deserves censure, for it
conviction--aiming at the punishment of vice and folly, and
patronizing talent and virtue: raising worthy men from the dust and
attaching them to our Brotherhood. Only then will our order have the
power unobtrusively to bind the hands of the protectors of disorder
and to control them without their being aware of it. In a word, we
citizenship, and beside which all other governments can continue in
aim of our order, which is to obtain for virtue the victory over vice.
good and for their own benefit to follow the example and instruction
of the best and wisest men.
"At that time, when everything was plunged in darkness, preaching
alone was of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth endowed her
with special strength, but now we need much more powerful methods.
It is now necessary that man, governed by his senses, should find in
the passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it
is therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his
passions within the limits of virtue. Our order should provide means
to that end.
"As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state,
each of them again training two others and all being closely united,
everything will be possible for our order, which has already in secret
accomplished much for the welfare of mankind."
excitement in the lodge. The majority of the Brothers, seeing in it
dangerous designs of Illuminism,* met it with a coldness that
since there had been so stormy a meeting. Parties were formed, some
meeting he was struck for the first time by the endless variety of
men's minds, which prevents a truth from ever presenting itself
identically to two persons. Even those members who seemed to be on his
alterations he could not agree to, as what he always wanted most was
At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will
alone, but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute.
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would
the usual formalities he left the lodge and went home.
Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded. For
three days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a
At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she
Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre
turning the conversation upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by way
of fraternal advice expressed the opinion that his severity to his
Freemasonry by not forgiving the penitent.
him imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a
most important matter. Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy
in the mood he then was, this was not even unpleasant to him.
importance, and under the influence of the depression that possessed
wife.
it was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to
her away. Compared to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of
late one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see
I have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down
what I have experienced. Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and has
for three years been suffering from a painful disease of the
very plain food, he is working at science. He received me graciously
the Knights of the East and of Jerusalem, and he responded in the same
the Prussian and Scottish lodges. I told him everything as best I
could, and told him what I had proposed to our Petersburg lodge, of
me my whole past and the future path I should follow. He surprised
and reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) The
improvement of the human race by striving for such purification. Which
self-purification. Only to this aim can we always strive independently
of circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands the
impurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of the
attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this ground
he said to me, "the chief duty of a true Mason, as I have told you,
lies in perfecting himself. We often think that by removing all the
virtue--love of death. Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its
life." These words are all the more remarkable because, in spite of
his great physical sufferings, Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of
loftiness of his inner man--he does not yet feel himself
sufficiently prepared. My benefactor then explained to me fully the
meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out to me that the
Brothers from pride, to turn them toward the true path
self-knowledge and self-perfecting. Besides this he advised me for
end he gave me a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in which
Petersburg, 23rd November
I am again living with my wife. My mother-in-law came to me in tears
that she was innocent and unhappy at my desertion, and much more. I
whose aid and advice to seek. Had my benefactor been here he would
Alexeevich's letters and recalled my conversations with him, and
deduced from it all that I ought not to refuse a suppliant, and
ought to reach a helping hand to everyone--especially to one so
closely bound to me--and that I must bear my cross. But if I forgive
regeneration.
At that time, as always happens, the highest society that met at
court and at the grand balls was divided into several circles, each
circle of the Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsev
and Caulaincourt. In this group Helene, as soon as she had settled
visited by the members of the French embassy and by many belonging
to that circle and noted for their intellect and polished manners.
Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the
Emperors and had brought from there these connections with the
Napoleonic notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant.
"C'est un superbe animal."* Her success as a beautiful and elegant
woman did not surprise Pierre, for she had become even handsomer
than before. What did surprise him was that during these last two
years his wife had succeeded in gaining the reputation "d' une femme
Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-page letters. Bilibin saved up his
received in the Countess Bezukhova's salon was regarded as a diploma
of intellect. Young men read books before attending Helene's evenings,
to have something to say in her salon, and secretaries of the embassy,
way Helene was a power. Pierre, who knew she was very stupid,
evenings and dinner parties, where politics, poetry, and philosophy
conjuror who always expects his trick to be found out at any moment.
But whether because stupidity was just what was needed to run such a
salon, or because those who were deceived found pleasure in the
deception, at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene Bezukhova's
reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly established
that she could say the emptiest and stupidest things and everybody
would go into raptures over every word of hers and look for a profound
meaning in it of which she herself had no conception.
*"That's a superb animal."
*[2] "Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely."
one's way, and far from spoiling the high tone and general
impression of the drawing room, he served, by the contrast he
tactful wife. Pierre during the last two years, as a result of his
for all else, had acquired in his wife's circle, which did not
interest him, that air of unconcern, indifference, and benevolence
inspires involuntary respect. He entered his wife's drawing room as
one enters a theater, was acquainted with everybody, equally pleased
joined in a conversation which interested him and, regardless of
whether any "gentlemen of the embassy" were present or not,
lispingly expressed his views, which were sometimes not at all in
concerning the queer husband of "the most distinguished woman in
Petersburg" was so well established that no one took his freaks
Among the many young men who frequented her house every day, Boris
Drubetskoy, who had already achieved great success in the service, was
him like a child. Her smile for him was the same as for everybody, but
sometimes that smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him Boris
deference also disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three
years before from the mortification to which his wife had subjected
"No, now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally
renounced her former infatuations," he told himself. "There has
source, he believed implicitly. Yet strange to say Boris' presence
physical effect upon Pierre; it constricted his limbs and destroyed
the unconsciousness and freedom of his movements.
him very much."
In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman, the rather
blind and absurd husband of a distinguished wife, a clever crank who
was taking place all this time in Pierre's soul, revealing much to him
and causing him many spiritual doubts and joys.
Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it
during that time:
24th November
and served on one of the committees.] Returned home for dinner and
dined alone--the countess had many visitors I do not like. I ate and
drank moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the
Brothers. In the evening I went down to the countess and told a
funny story about B., and only remembered that I ought not to have
done so when everybody laughed loudly at it.
I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. Great God, help me
to walk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer anger by calmness and
state, (b) family duties, (c) relations with my friends, and the
talked about worldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor's new
benefactor's words--that a true Freemason should be a zealous worker
called on to assist. My tongue is my enemy. Brothers G. V. and O.
new Brother. They laid on me the duty of Rhetor. I feel myself weak
and unworthy. Then our talk turned to the interpretation of the
magnificence of the spectacle. It was Boris Drubetskoy who was
from evil and lead him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts of
him did not leave me. It seemed to me that his object in entering
the Brotherhood was merely to be intimate and in favor with members of
whether N. and S. were members of our lodge (a question to which I
could not reply) and that according to my observation he is
and satisfied with the outer man to desire spiritual improvement, I
that he was smiling contemptuously at my words, and I wished really to
stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it. I could not be
eloquent, nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the Brothers and to
 After this, three pages were left blank in the diary, and then
the following was written:
I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Brother V., who
revealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohim
is the name of the ruler of all. The third name is the name
unutterable which means the All. Talks with Brother V. strengthen,
refresh, and support me in the path of virtue. In his presence doubt
has no place. The distinction between the poor teachings of mundane
examine it. In the holy science of our order all is one, all is
known in its entirety and life. The Trinity--the three elements of
matter--are sulphur, mercury, and salt. Sulphur is of an oily and
mercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combination produces other
bodies. Mercury is a fluid, volatile, spiritual essence. Christ, the
Holy Spirit, Him!...
3rd December
Awoke late, read the Scriptures but was apathetic. Afterwards went
when Dolokhov, meeting me in Moscow after our duel, said he hoped I
was enjoying perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. At
meeting and in my mind gave him the most malevolent and bitter
become much worse than he, for he is lenient to my rudeness while I on
the contrary nourish contempt for him. O God, grant that in his
may benefit. After dinner I fell asleep and as I was drowsing off I
clearly heard a voice saying in my left ear, "Thy day!"
one, began biting me. I lifted it up, but the higher I lifted it the
bigger and heavier it grew. And suddenly Brother A. came and, taking
my arm, led me to a building to enter which we had to pass along a
narrow plank. I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I began to
clamber up a fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands. After
much effort I dragged myself up, so that my leg hung down on one
side and my body on the other. I looked round and saw Brother A.
standing on the fence and pointing me to a broad avenue and garden,
strength of all the former ones, and aid me to enter that temple of
virtue to a vision of which I attained in my dream.
7th December
I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sitting in my house, and that I
grown young, and he was quietly telling me something about the
were sitting or lying on the floor. He was telling me something, and I
wished to show him my sensibility, and not listening to what he was
saying I began picturing to myself the condition of my inner man and
the grace of God sanctifying me. And tears came into my eyes, and I
was glad he noticed this. But he looked at me with vexation and jumped
up, breaking off his remarks. I felt abashed and asked whether what he
there is a double bed. He lay down on the edge of it and I burned with
frankly what is your chief temptation? Do you know it? I think you
my chief temptation. He shook his head incredulously; and even more
abashed, I said that though I was living with my wife as he advised, I
was not living with her as her husband. To this he replied that one
should not deprive a wife of one's embraces and gave me to
understand that that was my duty. But I replied that I should be
ashamed to do it, and suddenly everything vanished. And I awoke and
found in my mind the text from the Gospel: "The life was the light
comprehended it not." Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked young and
wrote about "conjugal duties."
I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart. I saw
once that the process of regeneration had already taken place in
and he said, "Hast thou noticed that my face is different?" I looked
but that he had no hair on his head and his features were quite
changed. And I said, "I should have known you had I met you by
and went with me into my study carrying a large book of sheets of
drawing paper; I said, "I drew that," and he answered by bowing his
love adventures of the soul with its beloved. And on its pages I saw a
with a transparent body, flying up to the clouds. And I seemed to know
Songs. And looking at those drawings I dreamed I felt that I was doing
debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!
CHAPTER XI
The Rostovs' monetary affairs had not improved during the two
years they had spent in the country.
Though Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to his resolution and was
still serving modestly in an obscure regiment, spending
management of affairs, in particular--was such that the debts
inevitably increased every year. The only resource obviously
post, so he had come to Petersburg to look for one and also, as he
said, to let the lassies enjoy themselves for the last time.
Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to Vera and was
acquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one. In Petersburg they
were provincials, and the very people they had entertained in Moscow
without inquiring to what set they belonged, here looked down on them.
Moscow, and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Country
Peronskaya a maid of honor, Pierre Bezukhov, and the son of their
Petersburg were Boris, Pierre whom the count had met in the street and
dragged home with him, and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostovs'
and paid the eldest daughter, Countess Vera, the attentions a young
man pays when he intends to propose.
Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded at
Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. He
narrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air
that everyone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed, and he
picked up the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aide-de-camp
believed it had been necessary to do this, and he received two
decorations for the Finnish war also. In 1809 he was a captain in
Petersburg.
be denied that he was a painstaking and brave officer, on excellent
terms with his superiors, and a moral young man with a brilliant
career before him and an assured position in society.
Four years before, meeting a German comrade in the stalls of a
made up his mind to marry her. Now in Petersburg, having considered
to propose.
*"That girl shall be my wife."
Berg's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was not
obscure Livonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countess
Rostova; but Berg's chief characteristic was such a naive and good
natured egotism that the Rostovs involuntarily came to think it
would be a good thing, since he himself was so firmly convinced that
seriously embarrassed, as the suitor could not but know; and above
she was certainly good-looking and sensible, no one up to now had
proposed to her. So they gave their consent.
"You see," said Berg to his comrade, whom he called "friend" only
because he knew that everyone has friends, "you see, I have considered
it all, and should not marry if I had not thought it all out or if
mamma are now provided for--I have arranged that rent for them in
the Baltic Provinces--and I can live in Petersburg on my pay, and with
her fortune and my good management we can get along nicely. I am not
bring her share and a husband his. I have my position in the
"And I love her, because her character is sensible and very good.
different--an unpleasant character and has not the same
intelligence. She is so... you know?... Unpleasant... But my
doubling up his tongue he blew a small round ring of tobacco smoke,
After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents by
Berg's proposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times
insincere. In the family's feeling toward this wedding a certain
having loved Vera sufficiently and of being so ready to get her off
their hands. The old count felt this most. He would probably have been
unable to state the cause of his embarrassment, but it resulted from
the state of his affairs. He did not know at all how much he had, what
already been sold, and the other was mortgaged and the interest so
much in arrears that it would have to be sold, so that it was
impossible to give it to Vera. Nor had he any money.
Berg had already been engaged a month, and only a week remained
hand. A few days before the wedding Berg entered the count's study
early one morning and, with a pleasant smile, respectfully asked his
consideration he gave the first reply that came into his head. "I like
your being businesslike about it.... I like it. You shall be
satisfied...."
And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end the
least part of the dowry in advance, he would have to break matters
"Because, consider, Count--if I allowed myself to marry now
without having definite means to maintain my wife, I should be
The conversation ended by the count, who wished to be generous and
for eighty thousand rubles. Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count on
impossible for him to arrange his new life without receiving thirty
thousand in ready money. "Or at least twenty thousand, Count," he
dear fellow, I'll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for
eighty thousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me."
Natasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to which
years ago. Since then she had not seen him. Before Sonya and her
mother, if Boris happened to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of
whether her engagement to Boris was a jest or an important, binding
promise tormented her.
Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had had not seen
near Otradnoe, but had never been to see them.
Sometimes it occurred to Natasha that he not wish to see her, and
this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders
"Nowadays old friends are not remembered," the countess would say
when Boris was mentioned.
rapturously and gratefully of the merits of her son and the
Petersburg Boris called on them.
his most poetic recollection. But he went with the firm intention of
himself and Natasha could not be binding either on her or on him. He
had a brilliant position in society thanks to his intimacy with
Countess Bezukhova, a brilliant position in the service thanks to
enjoyed, and he was beginning to make plans for marrying one of the
richest heiresses in Petersburg, plans which might very easily be
own room. When she heard of his arrival she almost ran into the
drawing room, flushed and beaming with a more than cordial smile.
from under her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had
known her four years before; and so he was taken aback when quite a
different Natasha entered, and his face expressed rapturous
"Well, do you recognize your little madcap playmate?" asked the
countess.
Boris kissed Natasha's hand and said that he was astonished at the
"I should think so!" replied Natasha's laughing eyes.
"And is Papa older?" she asked.
at her occasionally.
all comme il faut and in the latest fashion. This Natasha noticed at
once. He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess,
arranging with his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his
society, recalling with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow
acquaintances. It was not accidentally, Natasha felt, that he alluded,
when speaking of the highest aristocracy, to an ambassador's ball he
All this time Natasha sat silent, glancing up at him from under
looked round more frequently toward her, and broke off in what he
was saying. He did not stay more than ten minutes, then rose and
mocking eyes still looked at him. After his first visit Boris said
to himself that Natasha attracted him just as much as ever, but that
he must not yield to that feeling, because to marry her, a girl almost
former relations without intending to marry her would be dishonorable.
and spending whole days at the Rostovs'. It seemed to him that he
ought to have an explanation with Natasha and tell her that the old
such an explanation. From day to day he became more and more
entangled. It seemed to her mother and Sonya that Natasha was in
her album, making him write in it, did not allow him to allude to
the past, letting it be understood how was the present; and every
day he went away in a fog, without having said what he meant to, and
every day, and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs.
without her false curls, and with her poor little knob of hair showing
under her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and groaning on a rug and
bowing to the ground in prayer, her door creaked and Natasha, also
curlpapers, ran in. The countess--her prayerful mood dispelled--looked
that this couch will be my grave?" Natasha, flushed and eager,
seeing her mother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush, half sat down,
and unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself. Seeing
that her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and,
rapidly slipping one little foot against the other, pushed off her
slippers and jumped onto the bed the countess had feared might
become her grave. This couch was high, with a feather bed and five
up the bedclothes as she settled down, raising her knees to her
chin, kicking out and laughing almost inaudibly, now covering
herself up head and all, and now peeping at her mother. The countess
finished her prayers and came to the bed with a stern face, but
seeing, that Natasha's head was covered, she smiled in her kind,
weak way.
"Now then, now then!" said she.
"Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said Natasha. "Now, just one on
your throat and another... that'll do!" And seizing her mother round
mother Natasha seemed rough, but she was so sensitive and tactful that
however she clasped her mother she always managed to do it without
"About Boris... I know," she said seriously; "that's what I have
come about. Don't say it--I know. No, do tell me!" and she removed her
hand. "Tell me, Mamma! He's nice?"
head, I can see that...."
As she said this the countess looked round at her daughter.
mahogany sphinxes carved on the corners of the bedstead, so that the
countess only saw her daughter's face in profile. That face struck her
by its peculiarly serious and concentrated expression.
Natasha was listening and considering.
"Well, what then?" said she.
"You have quite turned his head, and why? What do you want of him?
"Why not?" said Natasha, without changing her position.
"Because he is young, because he is poor, because he is a
relation... and because you yourself don't love him."
"How do you know?"
"I know. It is not right, darling!"
 "But if I want to..." said Natasha.
"Leave off talking nonsense," said the countess.
"Natasha, I am in earnest..."
it over and began kissing first one knuckle, then the space between
the knuckles, then the next knuckle, whispering, "January, February,
March, April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don't you say anything? Speak!"
daughter and in that contemplation seemed to have forgotten all she
had wished to say.
"It won't do, my love! Not everyone will understand this
intimate with you may injure you in the eyes of other young men who
"I'll tell you some things about myself. I had a cousin..."
"I know! Cyril Matveich... but he is old."
"Why not, if he likes to?"
"How can you know? No, Mamma, don't speak to him! What nonsense!"
said Natasha in the tone of one being deprived of her property. "Well,
Natasha smiled and looked at her mother. "Not to marry, but just
"How so, my pet?"
"Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and shaking all over, she
"Don't laugh, stop!" cried Natasha. "You're shaking the whole bed!
You're awfully like me, just such another giggler.... Wait..." and she
seized the countess' hands and kissed a knuckle of the little
very nice. Only not quite my taste--he is so narrow, like the
dining-room clock.... Don't you understand? Narrow, you know--gray,
light gray..."
"What rubbish you're talking!" said the countess.
Natasha continued: "Don't you really understand? Nicholas would
understand.... Bezukhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he is
"You flirt with him too," said the countess, laughing.
"No, he is a Freemason, I have found out. He is fine, dark-blue
and red.... How can I explain it to you?"
"Little countess!" the count's voice called from behind the door.
"You're not asleep?" Natasha jumped up, snatched up her slippers,
and ran barefoot to her own room.
It was a long time before she could sleep. She kept thinking that no
one could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.
"Sonya?" she thought, glancing at that curled-up, sleeping little
kitten with her enormous plait of hair. "No, how could she? She's
virtuous. She fell in love with Nicholas and does not wish to know
herself in the third person, and imagining it was some very wise
man--the wisest and best of men--who was saying it of her. "There is
unusually intelligent, charming... and then she is pretty,
uncommonly pretty, and agile--she swims and rides splendidly... and
She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threw
herself on her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought that she would
immediately fall asleep, called Dunyasha the maid to put out the
candle, and before Dunyasha had left the room had already passed
into yet another happier world of dreams, where everything was as
Next day the countess called Boris aside and had a talk with him,
after which he ceased coming to the Rostovs'.
CHAPTER XIV
grandee of Catherine's day was giving a ball and midnight supper.
The diplomatic corps and the Emperor himself were to be present.
with innumerable lights. Police were stationed at the brightly lit
entrance which was carpeted with red baize, and not only gendarmes but
dozens of police officers and even the police master himself stood
with red-liveried footmen and footmen in plumed hats. From the
carriages emerged men wearing uniforms, stars, and ribbons, while
ladies in satin and ermine cautiously descended the carriage steps
which were let down for them with a clatter, and then walked hurriedly
and noiselessly over the baize at the entrance.
the crowd and caps were doffed.
"The Emperor?... No, a minister.... prince... ambassador. Don't
and mentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day.
A third of the visitors had already arrived, but the Rostovs, who
were to be present, were still hurrying to get dressed.
There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball in
the Rostov family, many fears that the invitation would not arrive,
the court of the Dowager Empress, who was a friend and relation of the
countess and piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersburg high
society, was to accompany them to the ball.
They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at ten
o'clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the girls were
not yet dressed.
Natasha was going to her first grand ball. She had got up at eight
that morning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all
day. All her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring
dressed as possible. Sonya and her mother put themselves entirely in
her hands. The countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and
already on; the hairdressing was almost done. Sonya was finishing
helping them all, was behindhand. She was still sitting before a
looking-glass with a dressing jacket thrown over her slender
pressing the head of a pin till it hurt her dainty finger, was
fixing on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin went through it.
right. Come here!"
holding Natasha's hair.
"Aren't you ready? It is nearly ten," came the countess' voice.
"Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?"
"I have only my cap to pin on."
"Don't do it without me!" called Natasha. "You won't do it right."
They had decided to be at the ball by half past ten, and Natasha had
which her dancing shoes showed, and in her mother's dressing jacket,
ran up to Sonya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother.
Turning her mother's head this way and that, she fastened on the cap
and, hurriedly kissing her gray hair, ran back to the maids who were
turning up the hem of her skirt.
The cause of the delay was Natasha's skirt, which was too long.
Two maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends of
countess and Sonya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer
"Mavra, quicker, darling!"
"Give me my thimble, Miss, from there..."
"It's ready, Miss," said the maid, holding up the shortened gauze
dress with two fingers, and blowing and shaking something off it, as
what she held.
father as he opened the door--speaking from under the filmy skirt
He was wearing a blue swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockings, and
"If you please, Miss! allow me," said the maid, who on her knees was
pulling the skirt straight and shifting the pins from one side of
her mouth to the other with her tongue.
looked at Natasha, "say what you like, it's still too long."
Natasha stepped back to look at herself in the pier glass. The dress
was too long.
"Really, madam, it is not at all too long," said Mavra, crawling
one minute," said the resolute Dunyasha taking a needle that was stuck
on the front of her little shawl and, still kneeling on the floor, set
to work once more.
At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, in
"Oo-oo, my beauty!" exclaimed the count, "she looks better than
He would have embraced her but, blushing, she stepped aside
it," and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking up
off.
"Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!"
"Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," said Dunyasha.
At a quarter past ten they at last got into their carriages and
behind her ears just as carefully, and when she entered her drawing
room in her yellow dress, wearing her badge as maid of honor, her
servants had been.
and at eleven o'clock, careful of their coiffures and dresses, they
Natasha had not had a moment free since early morning and had not
once had time to think of what lay before her.
In the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swaying carriage,
there at the ball, in those brightly lighted rooms--with music,
flowers, dances, the Emperor, and all the brilliant young people of
and closeness of the carriage. She understood all that awaited her
front of her mother, mounted the brightly illuminated stairs between
the flowers. Only then did she remember how she must behave at a ball,
and tried to assume the majestic air she considered indispensable
eyes growing misty, she saw nothing clearly, her pulse beat a
hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed at her heart. She
and she moved on almost fainting from excitement and trying with all
Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish her
reflection from the others. All was blended into one brilliant
procession. On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices,
footsteps, and greetings deafened Natasha, and the light and glitter
dazzled her still more. The host and hostess, who had already been
the various arrivals, "Charme de vous voir,"* greeted the Rostovs
and Peronskaya in the same manner.
*"Delighted to see you."
The two girls in their white dresses, each with a rose in her
involuntarily rested longer on the slim Natasha. She looked at her and
gave her alone a special smile in addition to her usual smile as
hostess. Looking at her she may have recalled the golden,
irrecoverable days of her own girlhood and her own first ball. The
host also followed Natasha with his eyes and asked the count which was
his daughter.
"Charming!" said he, kissing the tips of his fingers.
In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaiting
asking about her and looking at her. She realized that those
noticing her liked her, and this observation helped to calm her.
"That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? That gray-haired man,"
she said, indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-gray
is quite equal to Marya Antonovna. See how the men, young and old, pay
court to her. Beautiful and clever... they say Prince--is quite mad
plain daughter.
"She is a splendid match, a millionairess," said Peronskaya. "And
"That is Bezukhova's brother, Anatole Kuragin," she said, indicating
a handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them with head
handsome, isn't he? I hear they will marry him to that rich girl.
But your cousin, Drubetskoy, is also very attentive to her. They say
replied to the countess' inquiry about Caulaincourt. "Looks as if he
were a king! All the same, the French are charming, very charming.
No one more charming in society. Ah, here she is! Yes, she is still
the most beautiful of them all, our Marya Antonovna! And how simply
universal Freemason," she went on, indicating Pierre. "Put him
beside his wife and he looks a regular buffoon!"
Pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, making way through the
crowd and nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedly
as if he were passing through a crowd at a fair. He pushed through,
evidently looking for someone.
Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, "the
buffoon," as Peronskaya had called him, and knew he was looking for
them, and for her in particular. He had promised to be at the ball and
introduce partners to her.
But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome,
dark man of middle height, and in a white uniform, who stood by a
window talking to a tall man wearing stars and a ribbon. Natasha at
was Bolkonski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger,
present la pluie et le beau temps.* He's too proud for anything.
some project or other. Just look how he treats the ladies! There's one
talking to him and he has turned away," she said, pointing at him.
"I'd give it to him if he treated me as he does those ladies."
CHAPTER XVI
Suddenly everybody stirred, began talking, and pressed forward and
then back, and between the two rows, which separated, the Emperor
entered to the sounds of music that had immediately struck up.
Behind him walked his host and hostess. He walked in rapidly, bowing
to right and left as if anxious to get the first moments of the
reception over. The band played the polonaise in vogue at that time on
account of the words that had been set to it, beginning: "Alexander,
Elisaveta, all our hearts you ravish quite..." The Emperor passed on
to the drawing room, the crowd made a rush for the doors, and
Then the crowd hastily retired from the drawing-room door, at which
distraught, pounced down on the ladies, asking them to move aside.
Some ladies, with faces betraying complete forgetfulness of all the
rules of decorum, pushed forward to the detriment of their toilets.
polonaise.
Everyone moved back, and the Emperor came smiling out of the drawing
room leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to the
music. The host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina; then came
ambassadors, ministers, and various generals, whom Peronskaya
were taking up, or preparing to take up, their positions for the
polonaise. Natasha felt that she would be left with her mother and
and with bated breath and glittering, frightened eyes gazed straight
before her, evidently prepared for the height of joy or misery. She
whom Peronskaya was pointing out--she had but one thought: "Is it
possible no one will ask me, that I shall not be among the first to
dance? Is it possible that not one of all these men will notice me?
were saying, 'Ah, she's not the one I'm after, so it's not worth
enjoy dancing with me."
strangers, with no one interested in them and not wanted by anyone.
The handsome Anatole was smilingly talking to a partner on his arm and
looked at Natasha as one looks at a wall. Boris passed them twice
and each time turned away. Berg and his wife, who were not dancing,
came up to them.
This family gathering seemed humiliating to Natasha--as if there
were nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball. She did
own green dress.
At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner (he had danced
Rostovs requesting them to stand farther back, though as it was they
were already close to the wall, and from the gallery resounded the
distinct, precise, enticingly rhythmical strains of a waltz. The
Emperor looked smilingly down the room. A minute passed but no one had
raised her hand and laid it on his shoulder without looking at him.
The aide-de-camp, an adept in his art, grasping his partner firmly
first round the edge of the circle, then at the corner of the room
he caught Helene's left hand and turned her, the only sound audible,
apart from the ever-quickening music, being the rhythmic click of
partner's velvet dress spread out and seemed to flash as she whirled
round. Natasha gazed at them and was ready to cry because it was not
she who was dancing that first turn of the waltz.
Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearing
stockings and dancing shoes, stood looking animated and bright in
the front row of the circle not far from the Rostovs. Baron Firhoff
to be held next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected with
Speranski and participating in the work of the legislative commission,
could give reliable information about that sitting, concerning which
various rumors were current. But not listening to what Firhoff was
intending to dance who had not yet gathered courage to enter the
circle.
presence, and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to
dance.
"You always dance. I have a protegee, the young Rostova, here. Ask
her," he said.
"Where is she?" asked Bolkonski. "Excuse me!" he added, turning to
one must dance." He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated.
debut, remembered her conversation at the window, and with an
"Allow me to introduce you to my daughter," said the countess,
with heightened color.
remembers me," said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow quite
Natasha he held out his arm to grasp her waist before he had completed
Natasha's face, prepared either for despair or rapture, suddenly
brightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile.
"I have long been waiting for you," that frightened happy little
girl seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as
she raised her hand to Prince Andrew's shoulder. They were the
in their white satin dancing shoes did their work swiftly, lightly,
and independently of herself, while her face beamed with ecstatic
happiness. Her slender bare arms and neck were not beautiful--compared
Helene seemed, as it were, hardened by a varnish left by the thousands
of looks that had scanned her person, while Natasha was like a girl
exposed for the first time, who would have felt very much ashamed
Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly as
possible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed
chosen Natasha because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she
was the first pretty girl who caught his eye; but scarcely had he
embraced that slender supple figure and felt her stirring so close
to him and smiling so near him than the wine of her charm rose to
leaving her he stood breathing deeply and watching the other dancers.
CHAPTER XVII
After Prince Andrew, Boris came up to ask Natasha for dance, and
noticed and saw nothing of what occupied everyone else. Not only did
she fail to notice that the Emperor talked a long time with the French
that Helene had great success and was honored was by the special
noticed that he had gone because the ball became livelier after his
was again her partner. He reminded her of their first encounter in the
Otradnoe avenue, and how she had been unable to sleep that moonlight
night, and told her how he had involuntarily overheard her. Natasha
there had been something to be ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had
overheard.
Like all men who have grown up in society, Prince Andrew liked
meeting someone there not of the conventional society stamp. And
such was Natasha, with her surprise, her delight, her shyness, and
even her mistakes in speaking French. With her he behaved with special
care and tenderness, sitting beside her and talking of the simplest
"I'd be glad to sit beside you and rest: I'm tired; but you see
room to choose two ladies for the figure.
surprise, as he watched her. She did go first to her cousin.
"What rubbish sometimes enters one's head!" thought Prince Andrew,
"but what is certain is that that girl is so charming, so original,
married.... Such as she are rare here," he thought, as Natasha,
beside him.
When the cotillion was over the old count in his blue coat came up
to the dancers. He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them, and
asked his daughter whether she was enjoying herself. Natasha did not
answer at once but only looked up with a smile that said
reproachfully: "How can you ask such a question?"
"I have never enjoyed myself so much before!" she said, and Prince
Andrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace her
becomes completely kind and good and does not believe in the
possibility of evil, unhappiness, or sorrow.
At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the
absent-minded. A deep furrow ran across his forehead, and standing
by a window he stared over his spectacles seeing no one.
On her way to supper Natasha passed him.
Pierre's gloomy, unhappy look struck her. She stopped in front of
him. She wished to help him, to bestow on him the superabundance of
Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.
"Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyes
all the people at the ball alike were good, kind, and splendid people,
loving one another; none of them capable of injuring another--and so
they ought all to be happy.
CHAPTER XVIII
dwell on it long. "Yes, it was a very brilliant ball," and then...
original, un-Petersburg-like about her that distinguishes her." That
was all he thought about yesterday's ball, and after his morning tea
But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed for
work and could get nothing done. He kept criticizing his own work,
as he often did, and was glad when he heard someone coming.
The visitor was Bitski, who served on various committees, frequented
all the societies in Petersburg, and a passionate devotee of the new
ideas and of Speranski, and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger--one of
those men who choose their opinions like their clothes according to
the fashion, but who for that very reason appear to be the warmest
partisans. Hardly had he got rid of his hat before he ran into
Prince Andrew's room with a preoccupied air and at once began talking.
He had just heard particulars of that morning's sitting of the Council
that the Council and Senate are estates of the realm, he said that the
published," recounted Bitski, emphasizing certain words and opening
his eyes significantly.
"Ah, yes! Today's events mark an epoch, the greatest epoch in our
Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the
Council of State, which he had so impatiently awaited and to which
he had attached such importance, and was surprised that this event,
now that it had taken place, did not affect him, and even seemed quite
insignificant. He listened with quiet irony to Bitski's enthusiastic
matter to me or to Bitski what the Emperor was pleased to say at the
And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interest
Prince Andrew had felt in the impending reforms. He was going to
dine that evening at Speranski's, "with only a few friends," as the
host had said when inviting him. The prospect of that dinner in the
Prince Andrew, especially as he had not yet seen Speranski in his
domestic surroundings, but now he felt disinclined to go to it.
Speranski owned in the Taurida Gardens. In the parqueted dining room
this small house, remarkable for its extreme cleanliness (suggesting
friendly gathering of Speranski's intimate acquaintances already
Speranski's little daughter (long-faced like her father) and her
governess. The other guests were Gervais, Magnitski, and Stolypin.
ringing staccato laugh--a laugh such as one hears on the stage.
He entered the dining room. The whole company were standing
and evidently still the same waistcoat and high white stock he had
worn at the meeting of the Council of State, stood at the table with a
Speranski was laughing in advance at what Magnitski was going to
again crowned by laughter. Stolypin gave a deep bass guffaw as he
munched a piece of bread and cheese. Gervais laughed softly with a
hissing chuckle, and Speranski in a high-pitched staccato manner.
Still laughing, Speranski held out his soft white hand to Prince
"Very pleased to see you, Prince," he said. "One moment..." he
agreed that this is a dinner for recreation, with not a word about
Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speranski with astonishment,
regret, and disillusionment. It seemed to him that this was not
Speranski but someone else. Everything that had formerly appeared
Magnitski had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate
something still funnier. Most of the anecdotes, if not relating to the
humored ridicule. Speranski related how at the Council that morning
a deaf dignitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thought so
too. Gervais gave a long account of an official revision, remarkable
for the stupidity of everybody concerned. Stolypin, stuttering,
broke into the conversation and began excitedly talking of the
abuses that existed under the former order of things--threatening to
give a serious turn to the conversation. Magnitski starting quizzing
Stolypin about his vehemence. Gervais intervened with a joke, and
Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and find
amusement in a circle of friends, and his guests, understanding his
wish, tried to enliven him and amuse themselves. But their gaiety
grated on him like a false note. Prince Andrew did not laugh and
feared that he would be a damper on the spirits of the company, but no
He tried several times to join in the conversation, but his
water, and he could not jest with them.
There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said, it was
witty and might have been funny, but it lacked just that something
which is the salt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such a
thing existed.
patted the little girl with his white hand and kissed her. And that
affairs, which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to
story that had no connection with the previous conversation. For a few
and, remarking, "Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair,"
passed it to the servant and got up. All rose and continuing to talk
began to converse sensibly and quietly with one another.
"Now for the recitation!" said Speranski on returning from his
study. "A wonderful talent!" he said to Prince Andrew, and Magnitski
immediately assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous verses
in French which he had composed about various well-known Petersburg
people. He was interrupted several times by applause. When the
verses were finished Prince Andrew went up to Speranski and took his
leave.
They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into those
mirrorlike, impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of
him to have expected anything from Speranski and from any of his own
in Prince Andrew's ears long after he had left the house.
When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in
Petersburg during those last four months as if it were something
new. He recalled his exertions and solicitations, and the history of
which Berg was a member. He remembered how carefully and at what
those meetings, and how sedulously and promptly all that related to
Legal Code, and how painstakingly he had translated the articles of
the Roman and French codes into Russian, and he felt ashamed of
himself. Then he vividly pictured to himself Bogucharovo, his
peasants and Dron the village elder, and mentally applying to them the
CHAPTER XIX
Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited
which demanded the call, he wanted to see that original, eager girl
dark-blue house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier
than in her ball dress. She and all the Rostov family welcomed him
as an old friend, simply and cordially. The whole family, whom he
had formerly judged severely, now seemed to him to consist of
and good nature, which struck one especially in Petersburg as a
stay to dinner. "Yes," he thought, "they are capital people, who of
course have not the slightest idea what a treasure they possess in
Natasha; but they are kindly folk and form the best possible setting
for this strikingly poetic, charming girl, overflowing with life!"
In Natasha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completely
alien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world,
already begun to disconcert him. Now this world disconcerted him no
longer and was no longer alien to him, but he himself having entered
it found in it a new enjoyment.
After dinner Natasha, at Prince Andrew's request, went to the
clavichord and began singing. Prince Andrew stood by a window
ceased speaking and suddenly felt tears choking him, a thing he had
thought impossible for him. He looked at Natasha as she sang, and
something new and joyful stirred in his soul. He felt happy and at the
same time sad. He had absolutely nothing to weep about yet he was
chief reason was a sudden, vivid sense of the terrible contrast
between something infinitely great and illimitable within him and that
limited and material something that he, and even she, was. This
said he liked her singing as he liked everything she did.
Prince Andrew left the Rostovs' late in the evening. He went to
bed from habit, but soon realized that he could not sleep. Having
not at all troubled by his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh and
joyful as if he had stepped out of a stuffy room into God's own
fresh air. It did not enter his head that he was in love with Natasha;
and in consequence all life appeared in a new light. "Why do I strive,
why do I toil in this narrow, confined frame, when life, all life with
time for a very long while he began making happy plans for the future.
tutor and putting the boy in his charge, then he ought to retire
Italy. "I must use my freedom while I feel so much strength and
youth in me," he said to himself. "Pierre was right when he said one
CHAPTER XX
Moscow and Petersburg, came to see him. Berg arrived in an
immaculate brand-new uniform, with his hair pomaded and brushed
"I have just been to see the countess, your wife. Unfortunately
"I have now quite settled in my new rooms, Count" (Berg said this
agreeable), "and so I wish to arrange just a small party for my own
and my wife's friends." (He smiled still more pleasantly.) "I wished
to ask the countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and to
supper."
Only Countess Helene, considering the society of such people as
the Bergs beneath her, could be cruel enough to refuse such an
invitation. Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at
pleasure, and why though he grudged spending money on cards or
"But don't be late, Count, if I may venture to ask; about ten
coming. He is very good to me. We shall have supper, Count. So you
will do me the favor."
Contrary to his habit of being late, Pierre on that day arrived at
Having prepared everything necessary for the party, the Bergs were
ready for their guests' arrival.
pictures and new furniture sat Berg and his wife. Berg, closely
one, because only then does one get satisfaction from acquaintances.
managed from my first promotion." (Berg measured his life not by years
but by promotions.) "My comrades are still nobodies, while I am only
be your husband." (He rose and kissed Vera's hand, and on the way to
have I obtained all this? Chiefly by knowing how to choose my
Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman, and
paused, reflecting that this dear wife of his was after all but a weak
woman who could not understand all that constitutes a man's dignity,
what it was ein Mann zu sein.* Vera at the same time smiling with a
Berg, judging by his wife, thought all women weak and foolish. Vera,
supposed that all men, though they understand nothing and are
Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not to crush her
lace fichu for which he had paid a good price, kissing her straight on
"The only thing is, we mustn't have children too soon," he
continued, following an unconscious sequence of ideas.
"Yes," answered Vera, "I don't at all want that. We must live for
"Princess Yusupova wore one exactly like this," said Berg,
at one another, both smiling with self-satisfaction, and each mentally
thought Berg. "This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself."
"But please don't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests,"
said Vera, "because I know what interests each of them and what to say
to different people."
Berg smiled again.
conversation," said he.
neatness, and order; so it was quite comprehensible and not strange
by moving a chair for himself, and Berg and Vera immediately began
entertain their guest.
entertained with conversation about the French embassy, at once
began accordingly. Berg, having decided that masculine conversation
was required, interrupted his wife's remarks and touched on the
him to take part in the Austrian campaign and the reasons why he had
declined them. Though the conversation was very incoherent and Vera
was angry at the intrusion of the masculine element, both husband
and wife felt with satisfaction that, even if only one guest was
to every other evening party with its talk, tea, and lighted candles.
Before long Boris, Berg's old comrade, arrived. There was a shade of
condescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and Vera. After
Boris came a lady with the colonel, then the general himself, then the
Rostovs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other
satisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawing
room, at the sound of the disconnected talk, the rustling of
patted Berg on the shoulder, and with parental authority superintended
the setting out of the table for boston. The general sat down by Count
at the tea table, on which stood exactly the same kind of cakes in a
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre, as one of the principal guests, had to sit down to boston
change that had come over her since the ball. She was silent, and
not only less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed from
plainness by her look of gentle indifference to everything around.
"What's the matter with her?" thought Pierre, glancing at her. She
looking at him, made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her.
After playing out a whole suit and to his partner's delight taking
five tricks, Pierre, hearing greetings and the steps of someone who
at Natasha.
"What has happened to her?" he asked himself with still greater
surprise.
with a look of tender solicitude. She, having raised her head, was
looking up at him, flushed and evidently trying to master her rapid
suppressed was again alight in her. She was completely transformed and
from a plain girl had again become what she had been at the ball.
Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new and
Pierre changed places several times during the game, sitting now
with his back to Natasha and now facing her, but during the whole of
the six rubbers he watched her and his friend.
"Something very important is happening between them," thought
and made him neglect the game.
talking with Sonya and Boris, and Vera with a subtle smile was
that at a party, a real evening party, subtle allusions to the
tender passion were absolutely necessary and, seizing a moment when
Prince Andrew was alone, began a conversation with him about
as she considered Prince Andrew to be, she felt that she had to employ
her diplomatic tact.
When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was being carried
"What do you think?" Vera was saying with an arch smile. "You are so
discerning, Prince, and understand people's characters so well at a
attachments? Could she, like other women" (Vera meant herself),
"love a man once for all and remain true to him forever? That is
"I know your sister too little," replied Prince Andrew, with a
that the less attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to
"Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days," continued Vera--mentioning
"our days" as people of limited intelligence are fond of doing,
imagining that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities of
"our days" and that human characteristics change with the times--"in
till quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone. Now you
Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent.
"You are friendly with Boris, aren't you?" asked Vera.
cousinage est un dangereux voisinage.* Don't you think so?"
*"Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood."
careful with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and in the midst of
these jesting remarks he rose, taking Pierre by the arm, and drew
him aside.
surprise, and noticing the glance he turned on Natasha as he rose.
"I must... I must have a talk with you," said Prince Andrew. "You
loved.) "I... but no, I will talk to you later on," and with a strange
light in his eyes and restlessness in his movements, Prince Andrew
face. The party was very successful and quite like other parties he
had seen. Everything was similar: the ladies' subtle talk, the
samovar and the tea cakes; only one thing was lacking that he had
always seen at the evening parties he wished to imitate. They had
not yet had a loud conversation among the men and a dispute about
something important and clever. Now the general had begun such a
discussion and so Berg drew Pierre to it.
CHAPTER XXII
Next day, having been invited by the count, Prince Andrew dined with
the Rostovs and spent the rest of the day there.
and without concealing it he tried to be with Natasha all day. Not
only in the soul of the frightened yet happy and enraptured Natasha,
important that was bound to happen. The countess looked with sad and
sternly serious eyes at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natasha and
of being in the way when she was with them. Natasha grew pale, in a
panic of expectation, when she remained alone with him for a moment.
Prince Andrew surprised her by his timidity. She felt that he wanted
In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up to
"Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me anything now! One can't
talk about that," said Natasha.
But all the same that night Natasha, now agitated and now
frightened, lay a long time in her mother's bed gazing straight
before her. She told her how he had complimented her, how he told
her he was going abroad, asked her where they were going to spend
with him. What does that mean? Does it mean that it's the real
thing? Yes? Mamma, are you asleep?"
"All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, to sleep! Mummy!
Mummy! such a thing never happened to me before," she said,
surprised and alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself. "And
It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince
Andrew at Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him. It was as if she
feared this strange, unexpected happiness of meeting again the very
man she had then chosen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) and
ball. It is fate. Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this!
said her mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince
"Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?"
shedding tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother.
At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and
late become a frequent visitor of hers, and many brilliant ladies
and gentlemen. Pierre, who had come downstairs, walked through the
intimacy of his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedly
been made a gentleman of the bedchamber, and from that time he had
begun to feel oppressed and ashamed in court society, and dark
to avoid thinking about his wife, and about Natasha and Prince Andrew;
forced himself to work day and night at Masonic labors, hoping to
drive away the evil spirit that threatened him. Toward midnight, after
he had left the countess' apartments, he was sitting upstairs in a
shabby dressing gown, copying out the original transaction of the
Scottish lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudy with
tobacco smoke, when someone came in. It was Prince Andrew.
"Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied air.
"And I, you see, am hard at it." He pointed to his manuscript book
with that air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy
Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic expression of renewed life
on his face, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look,
like it before. I am in love, my friend!"
Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person
down on the sofa beside Prince Andrew.
"With Natasha Rostova, yes?" said he.
but the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and
suffered, but I would not exchange even that torment for anything in
don't you speak?"
"I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre suddenly, rising and
That girl is such a treasure... she is a rare girl.... My dear friend,
I entreat you, don't philosophize, don't doubt, marry, marry,
marry.... And I am sure there will not be a happier man than you."
"But what of her?"
"She loves you."
"Don't talk rubbish..." said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking into
Pierre's eyes.
"But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, holding him by the arm. "Do
you know the condition I am in? I must talk about it to someone."
"Well, go on, go on. I am very glad," said Pierre, and his face
different, quite a new man. Where was his spleen, his contempt for
life, his disillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom he
made up his mind to speak openly; and to him he told all that was in
and spoke of how he would either make his father consent to this
marveled at the feeling that had mastered him as at something strange,
apart from and independent of himself.
such love," said Prince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feeling
that I knew in the past. The whole world is now for me divided into
two halves: one half is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: the
"I cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. And I am very
happy! You understand me? I know you are glad for my sake."
and sad expression in his eyes. The brighter Prince Andrew's lot
Prince Andrew needed his father's consent to his marriage, and to
obtain this he started for the country next day.
alter his life or introduce anything new into it, when his own life
was already ending. "If only they would let me end my days as I want
to," thought the old man, "then they might do as they please." With
important occasions and, adopting a quiet tone, discussed the whole
In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards
birth, wealth, or rank. Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as young
as he had been and his health was poor (the old man laid special
stress on this), while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son
whom it would be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl. "Fourthly
you to put it off for a year: go abroad, take a cure, look out as
And that's my last word on it. Mind, the last..." concluded the
prince, in a tone which showed that nothing would make him alter his
feelings, or his fiancee's, would not stand a year's test, or that
a year.
Prince Andrew returned to Petersburg.
same. Pierre did not come either and Natasha, not knowing that
Three weeks passed in this way. Natasha had no desire to go out
listless; she wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in
the evenings. She blushed continually and was irritable. It seemed
to her that everybody knew about her disappointment and was laughing
at her and pitying her. Strong as was her inward grief, this wound
to her vanity intensified her misery.
The countess began to soothe Natasha, who after first listening to
her mother's words, suddenly interrupted her:
it! He just came and then left off, left off..."
"And I don't at all want to get married. And I am afraid of him; I
The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which
she knew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in the
mornings, and that day she returned to the old way of life which she
resonance, and began singing her solfeggio. When she had finished
her first exercise she stood still in the middle of the room and
joyfully (as though she had not expected it) to the charm of the notes
reverberating, filling the whole empty ballroom, and slowly dying
much of it? Things are nice as it is," she said to herself, and she
began walking up and down the room, not stepping simply on the
resounding parquet but treading with each step from the heel to the
toe (she had on a new and favorite pair of shoes) and listening to the
regular tap of the heel and creak of the toe as gladly as she had to
the sounds of her own voice. Passing a mirror she glanced into it.
"There, that's me!" the expression of her face seemed to say as she
caught sight of herself. "Well, and very nice too! I need nobody."
A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room
but she would not let him, and having closed the door behind him
continued her walk. That morning she had returned to her favorite
mood--love of, and delight in, herself. "How charming that Natasha
person. "Pretty, a good voice, young, and in nobody's way if only they
leave her in peace." But however much they left her in peace she could
then footsteps were heard. Natasha was looking at the mirror, but
did not see herself. She listened to the sounds in the hall. When
she saw herself, her face was pale. It was he. She knew this for
certain, though she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors.
Pale and agitated, Natasha ran into the drawing room.
face brightened. He kissed the countess' hand and Natasha's, and sat
down beside the sofa.
"I have not been to see all this time because I have been at my
father's. I had to talk over a very important matter with him. I
only got back last night," he said glancing at Natasha; "I want to
have a talk with you, Countess," he added after a moment's pause.
The countess lowered her eyes, sighing deeply.
"I am at your disposal," she murmured.
Natasha knew that she ought to go away, but was unable to do so:
something gripped her throat, and regardless of manners she stared
Again he glanced at her, and that glance convinced her that she
Natasha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew
"I have come, Countess, to ask for your daughter's hand," said
Prince Andrew.
"Your offer..." she began at last sedately. He remained silent,
looking into her eyes. "Your offer..." (she grew confused) "is
agreeable to us, and I accept your offer. I am glad. And my husband...
to me?" said Prince Andrew.
"Yes," replied the countess. She held out her hand to him, and
to his forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. She wished to love him
"I am sure my husband will consent," said the countess, "but your
"My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an express
condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a
"I will send her to you," said the countess, and left the room.
the bed, pale and dry eyed, and was gazing at the icons and whispering
something as she rapidly crossed herself. Seeing her mother she jumped
Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawing room. When
has now become everything to me?" she asked herself, and immediately
answered, "Yes, everything! He alone is now dearer to me than
everything in the world." Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast
"I have loved you from the very first moment I saw you. May I hope?"
cannot but know? Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?"
"Yes, yes!" Natasha murmured as if in vexation. Then she sighed
loudly and, catching her breath more and more quickly, began to sob.
"What is it? What's the matter?"
over closer to him, paused for an instant as if asking herself whether
in his heart his former love for her. Something in him had suddenly
desire, but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness,
fear at her devotion and trustfulness, and an oppressive yet joyful
sense of the duty that now bound him to her forever. The present
feeling, though not so bright and poetic as the former, was stronger
"Did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?" asked
Prince Andrew, still looking into her eyes.
"Is it possible that I--the 'chit of a girl,' as everybody called
me," thought Natasha--"is it possible that I am now to be the wife and
the equal of this strange, dear, clever man whom even my father
looks up to? Can it be true? Can it be true that there can be no
more playing with life, that now I am grown up, that on me now lies
a responsibility for my every word and deed? Yes, but what did he
yourself."
Natasha listened with concentrated attention, trying but failing
to take in the meaning of his words.
"Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be," continued
you to make me happy in a year, but you are free: our engagement shall
remain a secret, and should you find that you do not love me, or
smile.
"Why do you say that?" Natasha interrupted him. "You know that
cried, quite convinced that she spoke the truth.
year?..."
"And can't it be helped?" she asked. Prince Andrew did not reply,
"It's awful! Oh, it's awful! awful!" Natasha suddenly cried, and
impossible, it's awful!" She looked into her lover's face and saw in
it a look of commiseration and perplexity.
"No, no! I'll do anything!" she said, suddenly checking her tears.
"I am so happy."
The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed
couple their blessing.
Natasha's affianced lover.
CHAPTER XXIV
No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha's engagement to
Bolkonski was not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He said
that as he was responsible for the delay he ought to bear the whole
burden of it; that he had given his word and bound himself forever,
but that he did not wish to bind Natasha and gave her perfect freedom.
have full right to reject him. Naturally neither Natasha nor her
parents wished to hear of this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came
every day to the Rostovs', but did not behave to Natasha as an
her, and kissed only her hand. After their engagement, quite
It was as if they had not known each other till now. Both liked to
recall how they had regarded each other when as yet they were
nothing to one another; they felt themselves now quite different
the family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew;
trained the family to get used to him, proudly assuring them all
them, and that she was not afraid of him and no one else ought to
be. After a few days they grew accustomed to him, and without
restraint in his presence pursued their usual way of life, in which he
took his part. He could talk about rural economy with the count,
with Sonya. Sometimes the household both among themselves and in his
presence expressed their wonder at how it had all happened, and at the
evident omens there had been of it: Prince Andrew's coming to Otradnoe
and their coming to Petersburg, and the likeness between Natasha and
Prince Andrew which her nurse had noticed on his first visit, and
Andrew's encounter with Nicholas in 1805, and many other incidents
betokening that it had to be.
In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which always
go away and the couple, left alone, still remained silent. They rarely
spoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to
son. Prince Andrew blushed, as he often did now--Natasha
particularly liked it in him--and said that his son would not live
"Why not?" asked Natasha in a frightened tone.
"I cannot take him away from his grandfather, and besides..."
"How I should have loved him!" said Natasha, immediately guessing
his thought; "but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding
Sometimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and ask
with pride; when she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed
perplexity: "What does he look for in me? He is trying to discover
something by looking at me! What if what he seeks in me is not there?"
Andrew laughed. He seldom laughed, but when he did he abandoned
himself entirely to his laughter, and after such a laugh she always
thought of the separation awaiting her and drawing near had not
terrified her, just as the mere thought of it made him turn pale and
On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought
countess, and Natasha sat down beside a little chess table with Sonya,
"You have known Bezukhov a long time?" he asked. "Do you like him?"
And as usual when speaking of Pierre, she began to tell anecdotes of
Prince Andrew said with sudden seriousness--"I am going away and
heaven knows what may happen. You may cease to... all right, I know
"What can happen?"
Mademoiselle Sophie, whatever may happen, to turn to him alone for
advice and help! He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow, but
he has a heart of gold."
Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sonya, nor Prince Andrew
act on Natasha. Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that
understanding what awaited her. She did not even cry when, on taking
but for several days she sat in her room dry-eyed, taking no
interest in anything and only saying now and then, "Oh, why did he
go away?"
But a fortnight after his departure, to the surprise of those around
her, she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and
face.
CHAPTER XXV
During that year after his son's departure, Prince Nicholas
Bolkonski's health and temper became much worse. He grew still more
irritable, and it was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt of
his frequent fits of unprovoked anger. He seemed carefully to seek out
Princess Mary had two passions and consequently two joys--her
subjects of the prince's attacks and ridicule. Whatever was spoken
Nicholas--"into an old maid like yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew wants
Mademoiselle Bourienne, he would ask her in Princess Mary's presence
He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelings and tormented her,
of that proud word "justice." All the complex laws of man centered for
her in one clear and simple law--the law of love and self-sacrifice
was God. What had she to do with the justice or injustice of other
people? She had to endure and love, and that she did.
been gay, gentle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known
but he said nothing to her about his love. Before he left he had a
long talk with his father about something, and Princess Mary noticed
that before his departure they were dissatisfied with one another.
Julie Karagina in Petersburg, whom she had dreamed (as all girls
Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, tender friend Julie.
your excellent mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone,
can--I will not say comfort us--but save us from despair. Religion
alone can explain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend:
life--not merely harming no one but necessary to the happiness of
others--are called away to God, while cruel, useless, harmful persons,
or such as are a burden to themselves and to others, are left
living. The first death I saw, and one I shall never forget--that of
my dear sister-in-law--left that impression on me. Just as you ask
angel Lise, who not only never wronged anyone, but in whose soul there
were never any unkind thoughts, had to die. And what do you think,
dear friend? Five years have passed since then, and already I, with my
what way that death was but an expression of the infinite goodness
of the Creator, whose every action, though generally
incomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite love
for His creatures. Perhaps, I often think, she was too angelically
young wife she was irreproachable; perhaps she could not have been
so as a mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particularly
Prince Andrew, with the purest regrets and memories, but probably
she will there receive a place I dare not hope for myself. But not
to speak of her alone, that early and terrible death has had the
they are very clear and certain. I write all this to you, dear friend,
principle of life: not a single hair of our heads will fall without
The case is this: my father's health is growing noticeably worse, he
cannot stand any contradiction and is becoming irritable. This
irritability is, as you know, chiefly directed to political questions.
He cannot endure the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal
the grandson of the Great Catherine! As you know, I am quite
indifferent to politics, but from my father's remarks and his talks
with Michael Ivanovich I know all that goes on in the world and
Bald Hills in the whole world, it seems, is not accepted as a great
man, still less as Emperor of France. And my father cannot stand this.
It seems to me that it is chiefly because of his political views
that my father is reluctant to speak of going to Moscow; for he
foresees the encounters that would result from his way of expressing
from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the disputes
about Buonaparte which would be inevitable. In any case it will be
Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother
spirits. He has again become as I used to know him when a child: kind,
affectionate, with that heart of gold to which I know no equal. He has
realized, it seems to me, that life is not over for him. But
weaker. He has become thinner and more nervous. I am anxious about him
long ago. I hope it will cure him. You write that in Petersburg he
is spoken of as one of the most active, cultivated, and capable of the
gentry, is incalculable. On his arrival in Petersburg he received only
his due. I always wonder at the way rumors fly from Petersburg to
Moscow, especially such false ones as that you write about--I mean the
my brother will ever marry again, and certainly not her; and this is
why: first, I know that though he rarely speaks about the wife he
has lost, the grief of that loss has gone too deep in his heart for
him ever to decide to give her a successor and our little angel a
stepmother. Secondly because, as far as I know, that girl is not the
kind of girl who could please Prince Andrew. I do not think he would
choose her for a wife, and frankly I do not wish it. But I am
running on too long and am at the end of my second sheet. Good-by,
my dear friend. May God keep you in His holy and mighty care. My
dear friend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.
MARY
Natasha Rostova. The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his
betrothed and tender and confiding affection for his sister. He
understand and know what life was. He asked his sister to forgive
him for not having told her of his resolve when he had last visited
Bald Hills, though he had spoken of it to his father. He had not
done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her father to give his
consent, irritating him and having to bear the brunt of his
insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months, half of that
but as it is I have to postpone my return for three months. You know
me and my relations with Father. I want nothing from him. I have
been and always shall be independent; but to go against his will and
arouse his anger, now that he may perhaps remain with us such a
short time, would destroy half my happiness. I am now writing to him
whether there is hope that he may consent to reduce the term by four
months."
"Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead.... It won't
The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her
"Marry, marry, my boy!... A good family!... Clever people, eh? Rich,
Nicholas' stepmother and I'll marry Bourienne!... Ha, ha, ha! He
mustn't be without a stepmother either! Only one thing, no more
women are wanted in my house--let him marry and live by himself.
Perhaps you will go and live with him too?" he added, turning to
Princess Mary. "Go in heavens name! Go out into the frost... the
After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the
matter. But repressed vexation at his son's poor-spirited behavior
pretexts for irony a fresh one was now added--allusions to stepmothers
"Why shouldn't I marry her?" he asked his daughter. "She'll make a
splendid princess!"
And latterly, to her surprise and bewilderment, Princess Mary
noticed that her father was really associating more and more with
letter, but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to
Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, and
profoundest depths of her heart had a hidden dream and hope that
pilgrims who visited her without the prince's knowledge. The longer
greater was her wonder at the short-sightedness of men who seek
enjoyment and happiness here on earth: toiling, suffering, struggling,
and harming one another, to obtain that impossible, visionary,
was not enough: he wanted to bind his happiness to another woman.
Her father objected to this because he wanted a more distinguished and
wealthier match for Andrew. And they all struggled and suffered and
tormented one another and injured their souls, their eternal souls,
down to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and is
a probation; yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it.
one except these despised God's folk who, wallet on back, come to me
of ill-usage by him but for fear of causing him to sin. To leave
family, home, and all the cares of worldly welfare, in order without
for those who drive one away as well as for those who protect one:
higher than that life and truth there is no life or truth!"
There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty
called Theodosia, who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot
Once, when in a room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia
was talking of her life, the thought that Theodosia alone had found
the true path of life suddenly came to Princess Mary with such force
that she resolved to become a pilgrim herself. When Theodosia had gone
to sleep Princess Mary thought about this for a long time, and at last
made up her mind that, strange as it might seem, she must go on a
pilgrimage. She disclosed this thought to no one but to her confessor,
Father Akinfi, the monk, and he approved of her intention. Under guise
of a present for the pilgrims, Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim's
coat, and a black kerchief. Often, approaching the chest of drawers
whether the time had not already come to put her project into
Often, listening to the pilgrims' tales, she was so stimulated by
their simple speech, mechanical to them but to her so full of deep
meaning, that several times she was on the point of abandoning
everything and running away from home. In imagination she already
pictured herself by Theodosia's side, dressed in coarse rags,
envy, earthly love, or desire, and reaching at last the place where
there is no more sorrow or sighing, but eternal joy and bliss.
"I shall come to a place and pray there, and before having time to
get used to it or getting to love it, I shall go farther. I will go on
last reach that eternal, quiet haven, where there is neither sorrow
nor sighing..." thought Princess Mary.
CHAPTER I
The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor--idleness--was a
condition of the first man's blessedness before the Fall. Fallen man
not only because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our
idle and at ease. An inner voice tells us we are in the wrong if we
conditions of man's primitive blessedness. And such a state of
obligatory and irreproachable idleness is the lot of a whole class-
the military. The chief attraction of military service has consisted
and will consist in this compulsory and irreproachable idleness.
in which he already commanded the squadron he had taken over from
Denisov.
from home more frequent complaints from his mother that their
affairs were falling into greater and greater disorder, and that it
entanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly. He felt
that sooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life,
accounts with stewards, quarrels, and intrigues, its ties, society,
difficult and complicated; and he replied to his mother in cold,
formal letters in French, beginning: "My dear Mamma," and ending:
"Your obedient son," which said nothing of when he would return. In
grieved and mortified Nicholas. In the first place he was sorry that
should be lost to the home; and secondly, from his hussar point of
view, he regretted not to have been there to show that fellow
Bolkonski that connection with him was no such great honor after
all, and that if he loved Natasha he might dispense with permission
from his dotard father. For a moment he hesitated whether he should
not apply for leave in order to see Natasha before she was married,
but then came the maneuvers, and considerations about Sonya and
But in the spring of that year, he received a letter from his
mother, written without his father's knowledge, and that letter
persuaded him to return. She wrote that if he did not come and take
matters in hand, their whole property would be sold by auction and
they would all have to go begging. The count was so weak, and
trusted Mitenka so much, and was so good-natured, that everybody
took advantage of him and things were going from bad to worse. "For
God's sake, I implore you, come at once if you do not wish to make
me and the whole family wretched," wrote the countess.
This letter touched Nicholas. He had that common sense of a
The right thing now was, if not to retire from the service, at any
after his after-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars, an extremely
when he returned with the horse all in a lather, he informed Lavrushka
(Denisov's servant who had remained with him) and his comrades who
turned up in the evening that he was applying for leave and was
going home. Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that he
would go away without having heard from the staff--and this interested
him extremely--whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive
seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish
given one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would
his own regiment, but the whole brigade--gave Rostov a dinner to which
the subscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which there were
Major Basov; the tipsy officers tossed, embraced, and dropped
Rostov; the soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, and shouted
"hurrah!" and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as
During the first half of the journey--from Kremenchug to Kiev--all
wonder anxiously how things would be at Otradnoe and what he would
find there. Thoughts of home grew stronger the nearer he approached
square of the distance. At the last post station before Otradnoe he
gave the driver a three-ruble tip, and on arriving he ran
breathlessly, like a boy, up the steps of his home.
After the rapture of meeting, and after that odd feeling of
unsatisfied expectation--the feeling that "everything is just the
older. What was new in them was a certain uneasiness and occasional
discord, which there used not to be, and which, as Nicholas soon found
out, was due to the bad state of their affairs. Sonya was nearly
twenty; she had stopped growing prettier and promised nothing more
than she was already, but that was enough. She exhaled happiness and
surprised Nicholas most. Petya was a big handsome boy of thirteen,
merry, witty, and mischievous, with a voice that was already breaking.
As for Natasha, for a long while Nicholas wondered and laughed
"You're not the same at all," he said.
"On the contrary, but what dignity? A princess!" he whispered to
her.
"Yes, yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully.
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit
to Otradnoe and showed him his last letter.
now."
are you very much in love?"
"How shall I put it?" replied Natasha. "I was in love with Boris,
with my teacher, and with Denisov, but this is quite different. I feel
at peace and settled. I know that no better man than he exists, and
I am calm and contented now. Not at all as before."
marriage for a year; but Natasha attacked her brother with
exasperation, proving to him that it could not be otherwise, and
that it would be a bad thing to enter a family against the father's
"You don't at all understand," she said.
Nicholas was silent and agreed with her.
amazed Nicholas and even made him regard Bolkonski's courtship
"Why this delay? Why no betrothal?" he thought. Once, when he had
touched on this topic with his mother, he discovered, to his
soul she too had doubts about this marriage.
daughter's future married happiness, "he writes that he won't come
the last days of her girlhood, but I know what she is like every
time we receive a letter from him! However, God grant that
everything turns out well!" (She always ended with these words.) "He
is an excellent man!"
CHAPTER II
After reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull.
business matters for which his mother had called him home. To throw
off this burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his
arrival he went, angry and scowling and without answering questions as
even less than the frightened and bewildered Mitenka. The conversation
and the examination of the accounts with Mitenka did not last long.
The village elder, a peasant delegate, and the village clerk, who were
count's voice roaring and snapping and rising louder and louder, and
then words of abuse, dreadful words, ejaculated one after the other.
"Robber!... Ungrateful wretch!... I'll hack the dog to pieces! I'm
Then with no less fear and delight they saw how the young count, red
of the neck and applied his foot and knee to his behind with great
Never let me see your face here again, you villain!"
Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into the
shrubbery. (This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge for
culprits at Otradnoe. Mitenka himself, returning tipsy from the
town, used to hide there, and many of the residents at Otradnoe,
Mitenka's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and
with resolute strides and went into the house.
at the lodge, was calmed by the thought that now their affairs would
certainly improve, but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effect
this excitement might have on her son. She went several times to his
door on tiptoe and listened, as he lighted one pipe after another.
Next day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassed
smile, said to him:
"But you know, my dear boy, it's a pity you got excited! Mitenka has
told me all about it."
"I knew," thought Nicholas, "that I should never understand anything
"You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles. But they
were carried forward--and you did not look at the other page."
children, but he did not know how to remedy it). "No, I beg you to
"No, Papa. Forgive me if I have caused you unpleasantness. I
understand it all less than you do."
"Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryings
forward from page to page," he thought. "I used to understand what a
'corner' and the stakes at cards meant, but carrying forward to
that he did not meddle in business affairs. But once the countess
called her son and informed him that she had a promissory note from
Anna Mikhaylovna for two thousand rubles, and asked him what he
thought of doing with it.
"This," answered Nicholas. "You say it rests with me. Well, I
don't like Anna Mikhaylovna and I don't like Boris, but they were
our friends and poor. Well then, this!" and he tore up the note, and
that, young Rostov took no further part in any business affairs, but
devoted himself with passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new
pursuit--the chase--for which his father kept a large establishment.
The weather was already growing wintry and morning frosts
congealed an earth saturated by autumn rains. The verdure had
green islands amid black fields and stubble, had become golden and
bright-red islands amid the green winter rye. The hares had already
time of the year for the chase. The hounds of that ardent young
an undisturbed litter of wolf cubs.
to thaw. On the fifteenth, when young Rostov, in his dressing gown,
without any wind. The only motion in the air was that of the dripping,
garden were hung with transparent drops which fell on the freshly
and glistened like poppy seed and at a short distance merged into
the dull, moist veil of mist. Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy
porch. There was a smell of decaying leaves and of dog. Milka, a
hare, and then suddenly jumped up and licked him right on his nose and
mustache. Another borzoi, a dog, catching sight of his master from the
garden path, arched his back and, rushing headlong toward the porch
with lifted tail, began rubbing himself against his legs.
"O-hoy!" came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman's call
which unites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor, and round
the corner came Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman, a gray,
wrinkled old man with hair cut straight over his forehead, Ukrainian
and scorn of everything that is only seen in huntsmen. He doffed his
scorn was not offensive to his master. Nicholas knew that this Daniel,
disdainful of everybody and who considered himself above them, was all
weather, the hounds, and the huntsman that he was being carried away
mistress.
"What orders, your excellency?" said the huntsman in his deep
was silent. "Can you resist it?" those eyes seemed to be asking.
"It's a good day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, eh?" asked
Daniel did not answer, but winked instead.
"I sent Uvarka at dawn to listen," his bass boomed out after a
minute's pause. "He says she's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure.
They were howling there." (This meant that the she-wolf, about whom
they both knew, had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a small
place a mile and a half from the house.)
"Yes, sir."
Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicholas'
big study. Though Daniel was not a big man, to see him in a room was
like seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture and
surroundings of human life. Daniel himself felt this, and as usual
stood just inside the door, trying to speak softly and not move, for
hastened to say all that was necessary so as to get from under that
Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion
that the hounds were fit (Daniel himself wished to go hunting),
Nicholas ordered the horses to be saddled. But just as Daniel was
round her. Petya ran in at the same time.
couldn't help going."
"You know it is my greatest pleasure," said Natasha. "It's not fair;
you are going by yourself, are having the horses saddled and said
"But you can't. Mamma said you mustn't," said Nicholas to Natasha.
"Yes, I'll go. I shall certainly go," said Natasha decisively.
It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, but
business, careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on
the young lady.
CHAPTER IV
establishment but had now handed it all completely over to his son's
prepared to go out with the others.
In an hour's time the whole hunting party was at the porch.
time for attending to trifles, went past Natasha and Petya who were
trying to tell him something. He had a look at all the details of
the hunt, sent a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the
borzois, set off across the threshing ground to a field leading to the
Otradnoe wood. The old count's horse, a sorrel gelding called
Viflyanka, was led by the groom in attendance on him, while the
for him.
whippers-in. Besides the family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen and
more than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash
Each dog knew its master and its call. Each man in the hunt knew his
business, his place, what he had to do. As soon as they had passed the
fence they all spread out evenly and quietly, without noise or talk,
The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now and
air was still, warm, and silent. Occasionally the whistle of a
straggling hound could be heard.
When they had gone a little less than a mile, five more riders
with dogs appeared out of the mist, approaching the Rostovs. In
front rode a fresh-looking, handsome old man with a large gray
mustache.
"That's it. Come on!... I was sure of it," began "Uncle." (He was
a distant relative of the Rostovs', a man of small means, and their
neighbor.) "I knew you wouldn't be able to resist it and it's a good
thing you're going. That's it! Come on! (This was "Uncle's" favorite
expression.) "Take the covert at once, for my Girchik says the Ilagins
take the cubs from under your very nose."
The hounds were joined into one pack, and "Uncle" and Nicholas
her eager face and shining eyes, galloped up to them. She was followed
whipped and pulled at his horse. Natasha sat easily and confidently on
her black Arabchik and reined him in without effort with a firm hand.
"Uncle" looked round disapprovingly at Petya and Natasha. He did not
"Good morning, Uncle! We are going too!" shouted Petya.
said "Uncle" sternly.
"Nicholas, what a fine dog Trunila is! He knew me," said Natasha,
referring to her favorite hound.
"In the first place, Trunila is not a 'dog,' but a harrier," thought
Nicholas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her feel
understood it.
"You mustn't think we'll be in anyone's way, Uncle," she said.
don't fall off your horse," he added, "because--that's it, come on!-
possibly run out--went round above the ravine.
don't let her slip!"
"That's as may happen," answered Rostov. "Karay, here!" he
tackled a big wolf unaided. They all took up their places.
not to be late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when
him, where a wolf might come out. Having straightened his coat and
like himself. His horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilya Rostov,
though not at heart a keen sportsman, knew the rules of the hunt well,
and rode to the bushy edge of the road where he was to stand, arranged
his reins, settled himself in the saddle, and, feeling that he was
ready, looked about with a smile.
Beside him was Simon Chekmar, his personal attendant, an old
horseman now somewhat stiff in the saddle. Chekmar held in leash three
formidable wolfhounds, who had, however, grown fat like their master
and his horse. Two wise old dogs lay down unleashed. Some hundred
paces farther along the edge of the wood stood Mitka, the count's
hunt, by old custom, the count had drunk a silver cupful of mulled
favorite Bordeaux.
He was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. His eyes were
saddle, wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like a child taken out
for an outing.
terms for thirty years, and understanding the mood he was in
expected a pleasant chat. A third person rode up circumspectly through
the wood (it was plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind
cloak, with a tall peaked cap on his head. He was the buffoon, who
went by a woman's name, Nastasya Ivanovna.
"If you scare away the beast, Daniel'll give it you!"
"I know a thing or two myself!" said Nastasya Ivanovna.
"Hush!" whispered the count and turned to Simon. "Have you seen
"With young Count Peter, by the Zharov rank grass," answered
Simon, smiling. "Though she's a lady, she's very fond of hunting."
count. "She's as good as many a man!"
"Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He understands the matter so
knowing what would please his master.
"A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by the
Zavarzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a sight
when they rushed from the covert... the horse worth a thousand
rubles and the rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to search
"To search far..." repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had not
Sidorych..." Simon did not finish, for on the still air he had
distinctly caught the music of the hunt with only two or three
hounds giving tongue. He bent down his head and listened, shaking a
The count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked
of the hounds came the deep tones of the wolf call from Daniel's
hunting horn; the pack joined the first three hounds and they could be
heard in full cry, with that peculiar lift in the note that
the hounds, but changed to the cry of ulyulyu, and above the others
After listening a few moments in silence, the count and his
attendant convinced themselves that the hounds had separated into
two packs: the sound of the larger pack, eagerly giving tongue,
calling ulyulyu. The sounds of both packs mingled and broke apart
had entangled; the count too sighed and, noticing the snuffbox in
borzoi that was pushing forward out of the wood. The count started and
dropped the snuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up.
The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eyes
starting out of his head, raising his cap and pointing before him to
the other side.
"Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly showing that he had
The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left a
wolf which, softly swaying from side to side, was coming at a quiet
lope farther to the left to the very place where they were standing.
The angry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past the
horses' feet at the wolf.
The wolf paused, turned its heavy forehead toward the dogs
awkwardly, like a man suffering from the quinsy, and, still slightly
of its tail disappeared into the skirt of the wood. At the same
instant, with a cry like a wail, first one hound, then another, and
then another, sprang helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the
whole pack rushed across the field toward the very spot where the wolf
had disappeared. The hazel bushes parted behind the hounds and
Daniel's chestnut horse appeared, dark with sweat. On its long back
count his eyes flashed lightning.
say more to the frightened and shamefaced count, he lashed the heaving
flanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger the count
had aroused and flew off after the hounds. The count, like a
punished schoolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to win Simon's
sympathy for his plight. But Simon was no longer there. He was
before they could do so.
CHAPTER V
the huntsmen approached, receded, and rose, he realized what was
there, that the hounds had separated into two packs, that somewhere
expected the wolf to come his way any moment. He made thousands of
different conjectures as to where and from what side the beast would
come and how he would set upon it. Hope alternated with despair.
his way. He prayed with that passionate and shame-faced feeling with
which men pray at moments of great excitement arising from trivial
causes. "What would it be to Thee to do this for me?" he said to
but for God's sake do let the old wolf come my way and let Karay
spring at it--in sight of 'Uncle' who is watching from over there--and
seize it by the throat in a death grip!" A thousand times during
that half-hour Rostov cast eager and restless glances over the edge of
the wood, with the two scraggy oaks rising above the aspen undergrowth
visible above the bush on his right.
"No, I shan't have such luck," thought Rostov, "yet what wouldn't it
and looking to the left and then to the right and listening to the
slightest variation of note in the cries of the dogs.
Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him
across the deserted field. "No, it can't be!" thought Rostov, taking a
deep breath, as a man does at the coming of something long hoped
for. The height of happiness was reached--and so simply, without
eyes and remained in doubt for over a second. The wolf ran forward and
animal with a gray back and big reddish belly. She ran without
breath, looked round at the borzois. They stood or lay not seeing
the wolf or understanding the situation. Old Karay had turned his head
"Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rostov, pouting his lips. The borzois jumped
with quivering tail from which tufts of matted hair hung down.
physiognomy changed: she shuddered, seeing what she had probably never
seen before--human eyes fixed upon her--and turning her head a
little toward Rostov, she paused.
"Ulyulyu!" cried Nicholas, in a voice not his own, and of its own
accord his good horse darted headlong downhill, leaping over gullies
to head off the wolf, and the borzois passed it, running faster still.
the wolf, who, increasing her speed, bounded on in the same
direction along the hollow. The first to come into view was Milka,
with her black markings and powerful quarters, gaining upon the
turned its head to face her, and instead of putting on speed as she
usually did Milka suddenly raised her tail and stiffened her forelegs.
"Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas.
impetuously at the wolf, and seized it by its hindquarters, but
a couple of feet by all the borzois, who did not get any closer to
"She'll get away! No, it's impossible!" thought Nicholas, still
who was now his only hope. Karay, with all the strength age had left
him, stretched himself to the utmost and, watching the wolf,
him the wood where the wolf would certainly escape should she reach
it. But, coming toward him, he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping
almost straight at the wolf. There was still hope. A long, yellowish
impetuously at the wolf from in front and almost knocked her over. But
gnashing her teeth, flew at the yellowish borzoi, which, with a
piercing yelp, fell with its head on the ground, bleeding from a
Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing of the wolf's path,
eyes on Karay, tucked her tail yet further between her legs, and
increased her speed. But here Nicholas only saw that something
happened to Karay--the borzoi was suddenly on the wolf, and they
with the dogs, while from under them could be seen her gray hair and
outstretched hind leg and her frightened choking head, with her ears
laid back (Karay was pinning her by the throat), was the happiest
dismount and stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up
from among that mass of dogs, and then her forepaws were on the edge
of the gully. She clicked her teeth (Karay no longer had her by the
throat), leaped with a movement of her hind legs out of the gully, and
having disengaged herself from the dogs, with tail tucked in again,
went forward. Karay, his hair bristling, and probably bruised or
"Uncle's" huntsman was galloping from the other side across the
wolf's path and his borzois once more stopped the animal's advance.
all riding round the wolf, crying "ulyulyu!" shouting and preparing to
dismount each moment that the wolf crouched back, and starting forward
again every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she
would be safe.
Already, at the beginning of this chase, Daniel, hearing the
ulyulyuing, had rushed out from the wood. He saw Karay seize the wolf,
and checked his horse, supposing the affair to be over. But when he
saw that the horsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herself
but straight toward the wood, just as Karay had run to cut the
animal off. As a result of this, he galloped up to the wolf just
when she had been stopped a second time by "Uncle's" borzois.
Daniel galloped up silently, holding a naked dagger in his left hand
and thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip
as if it were a flail.
Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut,
breathing heavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a body
seize her by the ears. It was evident to the dogs, the hunters, and to
Daniel rose a little, took a step, and with his whole weight, as if
lying down to rest, fell on the wolf, seizing her by the ears.
gag her!" and, changing his position, set his foot on the wolf's neck.
as if bridled, her legs were bound together, and Daniel rolled her
over once or twice from side to side.
With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a
took her to the place where they were all to meet. The hounds had
killed two of the cubs and the borzois three. The huntsmen assembled
stick between her jaws, gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd
of dogs and men surrounding her. When she was touched, she jerked
her bound legs and looked wildly yet simply at everybody. Old Count
asked Daniel, who was standing near.
"Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, quickly doffing his cap.
Daniel.
"Ah, but you are a crusty fellow, friend!" said the count.
smile.
CHAPTER VI
The old count went home, and Natasha and Petya promised to return
very soon, but as it was still early the hunt went farther. At
alone in a hollow behind a hazel bush. The hounds had scarcely been
loosed before Nicholas heard one he knew, Voltorn, giving tongue at
intervals; other hounds joined in, now pausing and now again giving
fox had been found, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed along
the ravine toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.
ravine, he even saw the hounds, and was expecting a fox to show itself
The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois,
close to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and
borzoi dashed in followed by a black one, and everything was in
their bodies and with tails turned away from the center of the
The huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there a long time without
strapping it to the saddle. Their horses, bridled and with high
saddles, stood near them and there too the dogs were lying. The
huntsmen waved their arms and did something to the fox. Then from that
spot came the sound of a horn, with the signal agreed on in case of
"That's Ilagin's huntsman having a row with our Ivan," said
Nicholas' groom.
at a footpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds
was going on.
Nicholas dismounted, and with Natasha and Petya, who had ridden
up, stopped near the hounds, waiting to see how the matter would
rode toward his young master, with the fox tied to his crupper.
While still at a distance he took off his cap and tried to speak
respectfully, but he was pale and breathless and his face was angry.
"What has happened?" asked Nicholas.
"A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was my
gray bitch that caught it! Go to law, indeed!... He snatches at the
Petya to wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy's,
The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field, and there,
and were at law, hunted over places that belonged by custom to the
Rostovs, and had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very
woods the Rostovs were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs
had chased.
Nicholas, though he had never seen Ilagin, with his usual absence of
moderation in judgment, hated him cordially from reports of his
He rode in angry agitation toward him, firmly grasping his whip and
fully prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punish
his enemy.
Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentleman
Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ilagin a stately and
courteous gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young
count's acquaintance. Having ridden up to Nicholas, Ilagin raised
his beaver cap and said he much regretted what had occurred and
hunted by someone else's borzois. He hoped to become better acquainted
followed him in some excitement. Seeing the enemies exchanging
the young countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as
well as in her beauty, of which he had heard much.
To expiate his huntsman's offense, Ilagin pressed the Rostovs to
not to be observed by their companions and searching uneasily for
muscles like steel, a delicate muzzle, and prominent black eyes. He
had heard of the swiftness of Ilagin's borzois, and in that
beautiful bitch saw a rival to his own Milka.
In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Ilagin about the
year's harvest, Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch.
"A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a careless tone. "Is she
"That one? Yes, she's a good dog, gets what she's after," answered
Ilagin indifferently, of the red-spotted bitch Erza, for which, a year
in your parts, too, the harvest is nothing to boast of, Count?" he
went on, continuing the conversation they had begun. And considering
it polite to return the young count's compliment, Ilagin looked at his
borzois and picked out Milka who attracted his attention by her
breadth. "That black-spotted one of yours is fine--well shaped!"
said he.
"Yes, she's fast enough," replied Nicholas, and thought: "If only
a full-grown hare would cross the field now I'd show you what sort
of borzoi she is," and turning to his groom, he said he would give a
ruble to anyone who found a hare.
"I don't understand," continued Ilagin, "how some sportsmen can be
enjoy riding in company such as this... what could be better?" (he
one takes, I don't care about that."
"Of course not!"
"Or being upset because someone else's borzoi and not mine catches
something. All I care about is to enjoy seeing the chase, is it not
so, Count? For I consider that..."
who had halted. He stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his whip
must ride up.... Shall we both course it?" answered Nicholas, seeing
in Erza and "Uncle's" red Rugay two rivals he had never yet had a
my Milka at once!" he thought as he rode with "Uncle" and Ilagin
"A full-grown one?" asked Ilagin as he approached the whip who had
sighted the hare--and not without agitation he looked round and
whistled to Erza.
The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face.
"How can I join in? Why, you've given a village for each of your
against one another, you two, and I'll look on!"
"Rugay, hey, hey!" he shouted. "Rugayushka!" he added, involuntarily
men and her brother were trying to conceal, and was herself excited by
it.
not the gentlefolk, also moved away. All were moving slowly and
sedately.
"How is it pointing?" asked Nicholas, riding a hundred paces
But before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost coming
rushed downhill in full cry after the hare, and from all sides the
borzois that were not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare.
across the field setting the borzois on the hare. The tranquil Ilagin,
went, seeing only the borzois and the hare and fearing only to lose
once, but pricked his ears listening to the shouting and trampling
that resounded from all sides at once. He took a dozen bounds, not
very quickly, letting the borzois gain on him, and, finally having
rushed off headlong. He had been lying in the stubble, but in front of
him was the autumn sowing where the ground was soft. The two borzois
of the huntsman who had sighted him, having been the nearest, were the
red-spotted Erza passed them, got within a length, flew at the hare
seized him, rolled over like a ball. The hare arched his back and
"Milashka, dear!" rose Nicholas' triumphant cry. It looked as if
him, but when close to the hare's scut paused as if measuring the
leg.
not hearken to his appeal. At the very moment when she would have
seized her prey, the hare moved and darted along the balk between
running like a pair of carriage horses, and began to overtake the
borzois did not overtake him so quickly.
"Rugay, Rugayushka! That's it, come on!" came a third voice just
up with the two foremost borzois, pushed ahead of them regardless of
the terrible strain, put on speed close to the hare, knocked it off
sinking to his knees in the muddy field, and all one could see was
how, muddying his back, he rolled over with the hare. A ring of
glancing round with restless eyes while his arms and legs twitched. He
spoke without himself knowing whom to or what about. "That's it,
thousand-ruble as well as the one-ruble borzois. That's it, come
on!" said he, panting and looking wrathfully around as if he were
and only now had he at last succeeded in justifying himself. "There
muddy pad. "You've deserved it, that's it, come on!"
"She'd tired herself out, she'd run it down three times by herself,"
said Nicholas, also not listening to anyone and regardless of
"Once she had missed it and turned it away, any mongrel could take
it," Ilagin was saying at the same time, breathless from his gallop
breath, screamed joyously, ecstatically, and so piercingly that it set
everyone's ear tingling. By that shriek she expressed what the
others expressed by all talking at once, and it was so strange that
else would have been amazed at it at any other time. "Uncle" himself
twisted up the hare, threw it neatly and smartly across his horse's
back as if by that gesture he meant to rebuke everybody, and, with
an air of not wishing to speak to anyone, mounted his bay and rode
off. The others all followed, dispirited and shamefaced, and only much
walked along just behind "Uncle's" horse with the serene air of a
"Well, I am like any other dog as long as it's not a question of
him, he felt flattered that, after what had happened, "Uncle"
Toward evening Ilagin took leave of Nicholas, who found that they
were so far from home that he accepted "Uncle's" offer that the
hunting party should spend the night in his little village of
"And if you put up at my house that will be better still. That's it,
come on!" said "Uncle." "You see it's damp weather, and you could
rest, and the little countess could be driven home in a trap."
"Uncle's" offer was accepted. A huntsman was sent to Otradnoe for
a trap, while Nicholas rode with Natasha and Petya to "Uncle's" house.
Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to the
a woman, a lady, and on horseback--raised the curiosity of the serfs
to such a degree that many of them came up to her, stared her in the
face, and unabashed by her presence made remarks about her as though
she were some prodigy on show and not a human being able to hear or
understand what was said about her.
"Arinka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her skirt
dangles.... See, she's got a little hunting horn!"
"Goodness gracious! See her knife?..."
"How is it you didn't go head over heels?" asked the boldest of all,
"Uncle" dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which
take themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made
to receive the guests and the visitors.
neither was it noticeably neglected. In the entry there was a smell of
fresh apples, and wolf and fox skins hung about.
a folding table and red chairs, then into the drawing room with a
round birchwood table and a sofa, and finally into his private room
where there was a tattered sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits of
Suvorov, of the host's father and mother, and of himself in military
out of the room. Rugay, his back still muddy, came into the room and
lay down on the sofa, cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth.
Leading from the study was a passage in which a partition with
ragged curtains could be seen. From behind this came women's
wraps and sat down on the sofa. Petya, leaning on his elbow, fell
glowed, they were hungry and very cheerful. They looked at one another
(now that the hunt was over and they were in the house, Nicholas no
longer considered it necessary to show his manly superiority over
his sister), Natasha gave him a wink, and neither refrained long
from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had a
pretext ready to account for it.
After a while "Uncle" came in, in a Cossack coat, blue trousers, and
she had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe, was just the
brother's and sister's laughter (it could never enter his head that
they might be laughing at his way of life) he himself joined in the
merriment.
"That's right, young countess, that's it, come on! I never saw
anyone like her!" said he, offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stem
and, with a practiced motion of three fingers, taking down another
Soon after "Uncle's" reappearance the door was opened, evidently
throw back her head, this woman (who was "Uncle's" housekeeper) trod
her face. "Here I am. I am she! Now do you understand 'Uncle'?" her
expression said to Rostov. How could one help understanding? Not
only Nicholas, but even Natasha understood the meaning of his puckered
wine, different kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms, rye cakes made with
she brought a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preserves made with honey,
and preserves made with sugar.
All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's housekeeping,
gathered and prepared by her. The smell and taste of it all had a
smack of Anisya Fedorovna herself: a savor of juiciness,
cleanliness, whiteness, and pleasant smiles.
Natasha first one thing and then another.
After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostov and "Uncle" talked of
muttered incoherent words without waking up. Natasha felt so
such as often occurs when receiving friends for the first time in
visitors' mind, said:
"This, you see, is how I am finishing my days... Death will come.
That's it, come on! Nothing will remain. Then why harm anyone?"
this. Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good he had heard about
him from his father and the neighbors. Throughout the whole province
"Uncle" had the reputation of being the most honorable and
disinterested of cranks. They called him in to decide family disputes,
chose him as executor, confided secrets to him, elected him to be a
public appointments, passing the autumn and spring in the fields on
his bay gelding, sitting at home in winter, and lying in his overgrown
garden in summer.
"Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?"
"I did once, but gave it up. I am not fit for it. That's it, come
on! I can't make head or tail of it. That's for you--I haven't
Open the door, there!" he shouted. "Why have you shut it?"
they called the room for the hunt servants.
There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand opened the
door into the huntsmen's room, from which came the clear sounds of a
balalayka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, was
playing. Natasha had been listening to those strains for some time and
now went out into the passage to hear better.
"That's Mitka, my coachman.... I have got him a good balalayka.
It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in the
huntsmen's room when "Uncle" returned from the chase. "Uncle" was fond
of such music.
sounds pleased him very much.
tone. "Not 'very good' it's simply delicious!"
Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy had
seemed to her the best in the world, so also that song, at that
moment, seemed to her the acme of musical delight.
"More, please, more!" cried Natasha at the door as soon as the
balalayka ceased. Mitka tuned up afresh, and recommenced thrumming the
times and the same notes were thrummed again, but the listeners did
not grow weary of it and wished to hear it again and again. Anisya
like "Uncle's." "That's a good player of ours," she added.
"He doesn't play that part right!" said "Uncle" suddenly, with an
energetic gesture. "Here he ought to burst out--that's it, come on!-
"Do you play then?" asked Natasha.
"Uncle" did not answer, but smiled.
errand and brought back the guitar.
arching his left elbow with a somewhat theatrical gesture, and, with a
wink at Anisya Fedorovna, struck a single chord, pure and sonorous,
street. The tune, played with precision and in exact time, began to
same kind of sober mirth as radiated from Anisya Fedorovna's whole
being. Anisya Fedorovna flushed, and drawing her kerchief over her
correctly, carefully, with energetic firmness, looking with a
just stood. Something seemed to be laughing a little on one side of
and the time quicker and when, here and there, as he ran his fingers
over the strings, something seemed to snap.
"Lovely, lovely! Go on, Uncle, go on!" shouted Natasha as soon as he
Nicholas!" she said, turning to her brother, as if asking him: "What
played the piece over again. Anisya Fedorovna's smiling face
    Fetching water clear and sweet,
    Stop, dear maiden, I entreat-
played "Uncle" once more, running his fingers skillfully over the
strings, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders.
struck a naive and precise attitude preparatory to a folk dance.
"Now then, niece!" he exclaimed, waving to Natasha the hand that had
face "Uncle," and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion with
would have supposed, long ago have effaced? But the spirit and the
"Uncle" had expected of her. As soon as she had struck her pose, and
smiled triumphantly, proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear that
had at first seized Nicholas and the others that she might not do
the right thing was at an end, and they were already admiring her.
*The French shawl dance.
precision, that Anisya Fedorovna, who had at once handed her the
handkerchief she needed for the dance, had tears in her eyes, though
she laughed as she watched this slim, graceful countess, reared in
silks and velvets and so different from herself, who yet was able to
understand all that was in Anisya and in Anisya's father and mother
joyous laugh, having finished the dance. "Well done, niece! Now a fine
young fellow must be found as husband for you. That's it--come on!"
"He's chosen already," said Nicholas smiling.
who nodded her head with a happy smile.
train of thoughts and feelings arose in her. "What did Nicholas' smile
as if he thought my Bolkonski would not approve of or understand our
gaiety. But he would understand it all. Where is he now?" she thought,
"Don't dare to think about it," she said to herself, and sat down
again smilingly beside "Uncle," begging him to play something more.
"Uncle" played another song and a valse; then after a pause he
    As 'twas growing dark last night
    Fell the snow so soft and light...
"Uncle" sang as peasants sing, with full and naive conviction that
the whole meaning of a song lies in the words and that the tune
comes of itself, and that apart from the words there is no tune, which
exists only to give measure to the words. As a result of this the
good. Natasha was in ecstasies over "Uncle's" singing. She resolved to
give up learning the harp and to play only the guitar. She asked
After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men, who had been
and countess did not know where they were and were very anxious,
Petya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the two
Natasha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness.
huntsmen to ride in front with lanterns.
voice Natasha had known previously, but the one that had sung As 'twas
In the village through which they passed there were red lights and a
cheerful smell of smoke.
"What a darling Uncle is!" said Natasha, when they had come out onto
while. The night was dark and damp. They could not see the horses, but
caught and assimilated all the diverse impressions of life? How did
they all find place in her? But she was very happy. As they were
nearing home she suddenly struck up the air of As 'twas growing dark
last night--the tune of which she had all the way been trying to get
"Got it?" said Nicholas.
"I?" said Nicholas, trying to remember. "Well, you see, first I
thought that Rugay, the red hound, was like Uncle, and that if he were
for his manner. What a good fellow Uncle is! Don't you think so?...
Well, and you?"
where we are really going in the darkness, and that we shall arrive
and suddenly find that we are not in Otradnoe, but in Fairyland. And
then I thought... No, nothing else."
Natasha knew by the sound of his voice.
Prince Andrew at the same time as of the rest, and of how he would
well Anisya carried herself, how well!'" And Nicholas heard her
spontaneous, happy, ringing laughter. "And do you know," she
suddenly said, "I know that I shall never again be as happy and
tranquil as I am now."
"Rubbish, nonsense, humbug!" exclaimed Nicholas, and he thought:
"How charming this Natasha of mine is! I have no other friend like her
and never shall have. Why should she marry? We might always drive
about together!"
"What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!" thought Natasha.
CHAPTER VIII
parents conferring together anxiously and privately and heard
suggestions of selling the fine ancestral Rostov house and estate near
Moscow. It was not necessary to entertain so freely as when the
count had been Marshal, and life at Otradnoe was quieter than in
all their own people who had settled down in the house almost as
Vogel the dancing master and his family, Belova, an old maiden lady,
an inmate of the house, and many others such as Petya's tutors, the
girls' former governess, and other people who simply found it
of life without which the count and countess could not conceive of
existence remained unchanged. There was still the hunting
establishment which Nicholas had even enlarged, the same fifty
horses and fifteen grooms in the stables, the same expensive
presents and dinner parties to the whole district on name days;
there were still the count's games of whist and boston, at which-
himself be plundered of hundreds of rubles every day by his neighbors,
most profitable source of income.
step, and feeling too feeble to break the meshes or to set to work
carefully and patiently to disentangle them. The countess, with her
not the count's fault for he could not help being what he was--that
(though he tried to hide it) he himself suffered from the
consciousness of his own and his children's ruin, and she tried to
the Rostovs had known from childhood, and who had now become a wealthy
heiress through the death of the last of her brothers.
favorable answer from her. Karagina had replied that for her part
Several times the countess, with tears in her eyes, told her son
that now both her daughters were settled, her only wish was to see him
were accomplished. Then she told him that she knew of a splendid
At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to
mother's remarks were leading to and during one of these conversations
induced her to speak quite frankly. She told him that her only hope of
getting their affairs disentangled now lay in his marrying Julie
"But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune, would you
expect me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of
money?" he asked his mother, not realizing the cruelty of his question
and only wishing to show his noble-mindedness.
"No, you have not understood me," said his mother, not knowing how
happiness I wish for," she added, feeling that she was telling an
untruth and was becoming entangled. She began to cry.
would sacrifice anything for you--even my feelings."
not want a sacrifice from her son, she herself wished to make a
sacrifice for him.
"Maybe I do love a poor girl," said Nicholas to himself. "Am I to
sacrifice my feelings and my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma could
speak so to me. Because Sonya is poor I must not love her," he
thought, "must not respond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I should
certainly be happier with her than with some doll-like Julie. I can
always sacrifice my feelings for my family's welfare," he said to
sometimes with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment
between her son and the portionless Sonya. Though she blamed herself
often pulling her up without reason, addressing her stiffly as "my
Sonya because that poor, dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind,
so devotedly grateful to her benefactors, and so faithfully,
unchangingly, and unselfishly in love with Nicholas, that there were
no grounds for finding fault with her.
had come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he
defer his return till the beginning of the new year. Natasha was still
love, and was still as ready to throw herself into all the pleasures
of life as before; but at the end of the fourth month of their
capable of loving and being loved.
Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs' home.
the new dresses everyone put on, there were no special festivities,
though the calm frost of twenty degrees Reaumur, the dazzling sunshine
by day, and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for some
inmates of the house dispersed to various rooms. It was the dullest
time of the day. Nicholas, who had been visiting some neighbors that
morning, was asleep on the sitting-room sofa. The old count was
table, copying a design for embroidery. The countess was playing
patience. Nastasya Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the
Sonya, glanced at what she was doing, and then went up to her mother
and stood without speaking.
"Why are you wandering about like an outcast?" asked her mother.
"What do you want?"
"Him... I want him... now, this minute! I want him!" said Natasha,
with glittering eyes and no sign of a smile.
The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter.
"Don't look at me, Mamma! Don't look; I shall cry directly."
"Sit down with me a little," said the countess.
Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turned
quickly to hide them and left the room.
at a young girl who stood panting, having just run in through the cold
"Stop playing--there's a time for everything," said the old woman.
"Let her alone, Kondratevna," said Natasha. "Go, Mavrushka, go."
Having released Mavrushka, Natasha crossed the dancing hall and went
to the vestibule. There an old footman and two young ones were playing
cards. They broke off and rose as she entered.
"What can I do with them?" thought Natasha.
"Just a few oats?" said Misha, cheerfully and readily.
"Go, go quickly," the old man urged him.
On her way past the butler's pantry she told them to set a
samovar, though it was not at all the time for tea.
Foka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered person in the house.
Natasha liked to test her power over him. He distrusted the order
"Oh dear, what a young lady!" said Foka, pretending to frown at
Natasha.
No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble
them would get angry or sulky with her; but the serfs fulfilled no
one's orders so readily as they did hers. "What can I do, where can
I go?" thought she, as she went slowly along the passage.
"Nastasya Ivanovna, what sort of children shall I have?" she asked
the buffoon, who was coming toward her in a woman's jacket.
"Why, fleas, crickets, grasshoppers," answered the buffoon.
"O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, where am I to go? What am
upstairs to see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story.
Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels at a table, on which
"The island of Madagascar," she said, "Ma-da-gas-car," she repeated,
him he was preparing fireworks to let off that night.
"Petya! Petya!" she called to him. "Carry me downstairs."
Petya ran up and offered her his back. She jumped on it, putting her
arms round his neck, and he pranced along with her.
Having as it were reviewed her kingdom, tested her power, and made
sure that everyone was submissive, but that all the same it was
dull, Natasha betook herself to the ballroom, picked up her guitar,
fingers over the strings in the bass, picking out a passage she
recalled from an opera she had heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew.
listeners, but in her imagination a whole series of reminiscences
arose from those sounds. She sat behind the bookcase with her eyes
fixed on a streak of light escaping from the pantry door and
listened to herself and pondered. She was in a mood for brooding on
the past.
at her and at the crack in the pantry door, and it seemed to her
that she remembered the light failing through that crack once before
"Oh, you are there!" said Sonya with a start, and came near and
listened. "I don't know. A storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid of
being wrong.
"There! That's just how she started and just how she came up smiling
just the same way I thought there was something lacking in her."
"No, it's the chorus from The Water-Carrier, listen!" and Natasha
were you going?" she asked.
"You always find something to do, but I can't," said Natasha. "And
where's Nicholas?"
"Asleep, I think."
and sing."
regretting not having done so, she again passed in fancy to the time
when she was with him and he was looking at her with a lover's eyes.
And, worst of all, I am growing old--that's the thing! There won't
then be in me what there is now. But perhaps he'll come today, will
put down the guitar, and went to the drawing room.
already at the tea table. The servants stood round the table--but
"Ah, here she is!" said the old count, when he saw Natasha enter.
"Well, sit down by me." But Natasha stayed by her mother and glanced
quickly!" and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs.
She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation between
the elders and Nicholas, who had also come to the table. "My God, my
God! The same faces, the same talk, Papa holding his cup and blowing
in the same way!" thought Natasha, feeling with horror a sense of
were always the same.
After tea, Nicholas, Sonya, and Natasha went to the sitting room, to
their favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began.
"Does it ever happen to you," said Natasha to her brother, when
"I should think so!" he replied. "I have felt like that when
everything was all right and everyone was cheerful. The thought has
"Oh yes, I know, I know, I know!" Natasha interrupted him. "When I
was punished once about some plums? You were all dancing, and I sat
sorry for everyone, for myself, and for everyone. And I was
innocent--that was the chief thing," said Natasha. "Do you remember?"
"I remember," answered Nicholas. "I remember that I came to you
afterwards and wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I felt
into the study--that was in the old house--and it was dark--we went in
and suddenly there stood..."
I remember. Even now I don't know whether there really was a Negro, or
if we only dreamed it or were told about him."
"Yes, yes, I do remember something too," Sonya answered timidly.
"You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro," said
Natasha, "and they say there was no Negro at all. But you see, you
"Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them."
"Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun
in the porch?"
So they went through their memories, smiling with pleasure: not
the sad memories of old age, but poetic, youthful ones--those
impressions of one's most distant past in which dreams and realities
blend--and they laughed with quiet enjoyment.
Sonya, as always, did not quite keep pace with them, though they
shared the same reminiscences.
Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what she
recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced.
She simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.
She only really took part when they recalled Sonya's first
would be sewn up with cords.
it then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable."
door of the sitting room.
"They have brought the cock, Miss," she said in a whisper.
"It isn't wanted, Petya. Tell them to take it away," replied
In the middle of their talk in the sitting room, Dimmler came in and
went up to the harp that stood there in a corner. He took off its
"Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field," came the
Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Natasha, Nicholas, and Sonya,
remarked: "How quiet you young people are!"
Dimmler began to play; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the
quietly in her former place. It was dark in the room especially
silvery light of the full moon fell on the floor. Dimmler had finished
the piece but still sat softly running his fingers over the strings,
evidently uncertain whether to stop or to play something else.
"Do you know," said Natasha in a whisper, moving closer to
"That is metempsychosis," said Sonya, who had always learned well,
lived in animals, and will go back into animals again."
"No, I don't believe we ever were in animals," said Natasha, still
in a whisper though the music had ceased. "But I am certain that we
were angels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why we
remember...."
"May I join you?" said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he sat
down by them.
"No, that can't be!"
"Not lower, who said we were lower?... How do I know what I was
before?" Natasha rejoined with conviction. "The soul is immortal--well
then, if I shall always live I must have lived before, lived for a
Dimmler, who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescending
smile but now spoke as quietly and seriously as they.
"Why is it hard to imagine eternity?" said Natasha. "It is now
and the day before..."
"Natasha! Now it's your turn. Sing me something," they heard the
countess say. "Why are you sitting there like conspirators?"
she rose.
None of them, not even the middle-aged Dimmler, wanted to break
off their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room, but
usual in the middle of the hall and choosing the place where the
resonance was best, Natasha began to sing her mother's favorite song.
sung, and long before she again sang, as she did that evening. The
count, from his study where he was talking to Mitenka, heard her
his talk while giving orders to the steward, and at last stopped,
Nicholas did not take his eyes off his sister and drew breath in
difference there was between herself and her friend, and how
and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prince Andrew.
"Ah, Countess," he said at last, "that's a European talent, she
has nothing to learn--what softness, tenderness, and strength...."
"Ah, how afraid I am for her, how afraid I am!" said the countess,
not realizing to whom she was speaking. Her maternal instinct told her
Natasha stopped abruptly.
"Idiot!" she screamed at her brother and, running to a chair,
"It's nothing, Mamma, really it's nothing; only Petya startled
me," she said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs
The mummers (some of the house serfs) dressed up as bears, Turks,
innkeepers, and ladies--frightening and funny--bringing in with them
the cold from outside and a feeling of gaiety, crowded, at first
into the ballroom where, shyly at first and then more and more merrily
games. The countess, when she had identified them and laughed at their
costumes, went into the drawing room. The count sat in the ballroom,
disappeared.
Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in the
ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt--this was Nicholas. A Turkish
Circassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows.
that their costumes were so good that they ought to be shown
elsewhere.
take them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them
about a dozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Uncle's."
wouldn't have room to turn round there. If you must go, go to the
Melyukovs'."
governesses, lived three miles from the Rostovs.
"That's right, my dear," chimed in the old count, thoroughly
open her eyes."
but that if Louisa Ivanovna (Madame Schoss) would go with them, the
shy, more urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse.
were extraordinarily becoming. Everyone told her she looked very
decided, and in her male attire she seemed quite a different person.
sleighs with large and small bells, their runners squeaking and
whistling over the frozen snow, drove up to the porch.
talking, calling to one another, laughing, and shouting.
the old count's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse, the
fourth was Nicholas' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse.
Nicholas, in his old lady's dress over which he had belted his
hussar overcoat, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in hand.
It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the
metal harness disks and from the eyes of the horses, who looked
round in alarm at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof.
sleigh; Dimmler, his wife, and Petya, into the old count's, and the
rest of the mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs.
"You go ahead, Zakhar!" shouted Nicholas to his father's coachman,
wishing for a chance to race past him.
The old count's troyka, with Dimmler and his party, started forward,
squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow, its
deep-toned bell clanging. The side horses, pressing against the shafts
like sugar, and threw it up.
Nicholas set off, following the first sleigh; behind him the
others moved noisily, their runners squeaking. At first they drove
hid the brilliant moonlight, but as soon as they were past the
fence, the snowy plain bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out
way, and rudely breaking the frost-bound stillness, the troykas
began to speed along the road, one after the other.
"A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" rang out Natasha's voice
"How light it is, Nicholas!" came Sonya's voice.
closer. Quite a new, sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches
in the moonlight.
smiled.
"What is it, Nicholas?"
"Nothing," said he and turned again to the horses.
runners and cut up by rough-shod hoofs, the marks of which were
their own accord and increased their pace. The near side horse,
arching his head and breaking into a short canter, tugged at his
if asking: "Isn't it time to begin now?" In front, already far ahead
side and flourishing the whip.
that one noticed how fast the troyka was flying. Nicholas looked back.
Nicholas overtook the first sleigh. They were driving downhill and
coming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow, near a river.
meadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven only knows what it is! It is
something new and enchanted. Well, whatever it may be..." And shouting
Nicholas gave the horses the rein, and Zakhar, stretching out his
"Now, look out, master!" he cried.
feet of the galloping side horses. Nicholas began to draw ahead.
Zakhar, while still keeping his arms extended, raised one hand with
the reins.
"No you won't, master!" he shouted.
Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhar. The
beside them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused
glimpses of swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they
Again checking his horses, Nicholas looked around him. They were
still surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled
with stars.
left?" thought Nicholas. "Are we getting to the Melyukovs'? Is this
Melyukovka? Heaven only knows where we are going, and heaven knows
strange, pretty, unfamiliar people--the one with fine eyebrows and
"I think this used to be Natasha," thought Nicholas, "and that was
Madame Schoss, but perhaps it's not, and this Circassian with the
"Aren't you cold?" he asked.
They did not answer but began to laugh. Dimmler from the sleigh
behind shouted something--probably something funny--but they could not
"Yes, yes!" some voices answered, laughing.
"But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows, and a
heaven knows where and have come to Melyukovka," thought Nicholas.
Pelageya Danilovna Melyukova, a broadly built, energetic woman
wearing spectacles, sat in the drawing room in a loose dress,
the steps and voices of new arrivals in the vestibule.
throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule,
came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted. The
clown--Dimmler--and the lady--Nicholas--started a dance. Surrounded by
the screaming children the mummers, covering their faces and
themselves about the room.
"Dear me! there's no recognizing them! And Natasha! See whom she
looks like! She really reminds me of somebody. But Herr Dimmler--isn't
Circassian. Really, how becoming it is to dear Sonya. And who is that?
Well, you have cheered us up! Nikita and Vanya--clear away the tables!
And we were sitting so quietly. Ha, ha, ha!... The hussar, the hussar!
Just like a boy! And the legs!... I can't look at him..." different
voices were saying.
the back rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male
garments were called for and received from the footman by bare girlish
arms from behind the door. Ten minutes later, all the young
visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,
went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles,
recognize any of them. It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she
failed to recognize, she did not even recognize her own daughters,
or her late husband's, dressing gowns and uniforms, which they had put
"And who is is this?" she asked her governess, peering into the face
of her own daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar. "I suppose it is one
in?" she asked Natasha. "Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" she
ordered the butler who was handing things round. "That's not forbidden
Sometimes, as she looked at the strange but amusing capers cut by
one would recognize them--were not at all shy, Pelageya Danilovna
with irrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter.
After Russian country dances and chorus dances, Pelageya Danilovna
corked eyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspiring,
flushed, and merry faces. Pelageya Danilovna began to recognize the
mummers, admired their cleverly contrived costumes, and particularly
how they suited the young ladies, and she thanked them all for
having entertained her so well. The visitors were invited to supper in
said an old maid who lived with the Melyukovs, during supper.
"Why?" said the eldest Melyukov girl.
"You wouldn't go, it takes courage..."
"I'll go," said Sonya.
"Tell what happened to the young lady!" said the second Melyukov
"Well," began the old maid, "a young lady once went out, took a
just in the shape of a man, like an officer--comes in and sits down to
table with her."
"Yes? And how... did he speak?"
"Yes, like a man. Everything quite all right, and he began
persuading her; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow,
hands. Then he caught her up. It was lucky the maids ran in just
then..."
"Now, why frighten them?" said Pelageya Danilovna.
"Mamma, you used to try your fate yourself..." said her daughter.
"And how does one do it in a barn?" inquired Sonya.
shifting grain is good and one sometimes hears that, too."
"Mamma, tell us what happened to you in the barn."
"Louisa Ivanovna, may I?" asked Sonya.
Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble game
or talking as now, Nicholas did not leave Sonya's side, and gazed at
her with quite new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today,
thanks to that burnt-cork mustache, that he had fully learned to
"So that's what she is like; what a fool I have been!" he thought
gazing at her sparkling eyes, and under the mustache a happy rapturous
smile dimpled her cheeks, a smile he had never seen before.
"I'm not afraid of anything," said Sonya. "May I go at once?" She
got up.
They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and
head and shoulders and glanced at Nicholas.
"What a darling that girl is!" thought he. "And what have I been
thinking of till now?"
Sonya went out into the passage to go to the barn. Nicholas went
hastily to the front porch, saying he felt too hot. The crowd of
even brighter than before. The light was so strong and the snow
sparkled with so many stars that one did not wish to look up at the
sky and the real stars were unnoticed. The sky was black and dreary,
while the earth was gay.
"I am a fool, a fool! what have I been waiting for?" thought
Nicholas, and running out from the porch he went round the corner of
would pass that way. Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood
barn. The log walls of the barn and its snow-covered roof, that looked
perfectly silent. His bosom seemed to inhale not air but the
From the back porch came the sound of feet descending the steps, the
bottom step upon which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and he
heard the voice of an old maidservant saying, "Straight, straight,
"I am not afraid," answered Sonya's voice, and along the path toward
thin shoes.
Sonya came along, wrapped in her cloak. She was only a couple of
paces away when she saw him, and to her too he was not the Nicholas
she had known and always slightly feared. He was in a woman's dress,
toward him.
face all lit up by the moonlight. He slipped his arms under the
cloak that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, and
cork. Sonya kissed him full on the lips, and disengaging her little
hands pressed them to his cheeks.
"Sonya!... Nicholas!"... was all they said. They ran to the barn and
then back again, re-entering, he by the front and she by the back
porch.
should go back in the sleigh with Dimmler, and Sonya with Nicholas and
and kept peering by that fantastic all-transforming light into Sonya's
face and searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former
again. He looked and recognizing in her both the old and the new
Sonya, and being reminded by the smell of burnt cork of the
sensation of her kiss, inhaled the frosty air with a full breast
and, looking at the ground flying beneath him and at the sparkling
"Sonya, is it well with thee?" he asked from time to time.
"Yes!" she replied. "And with thee?"
When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and
ran for a moment to Natasha's sleigh and stood on its wing.
"Natasha!" he whispered in French, "do you know I have made up my
"Have you told her?" asked Natasha, suddenly beaming all over with
"I am so glad, so glad! I was beginning to be vexed with you. I
did not tell you, but you have been treating her badly. What a heart
she has, Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was ashamed to be
happy while Sonya was not," continued Natasha. "Now I am so glad!
"No, wait a bit.... Oh, how funny you look!" cried Nicholas, peering
"Natasha, it's magical, isn't it?"
"Yes," she replied. "You have done splendidly."
"Had I seen her before as she is now," thought Nicholas, "I should
long ago have asked her what to do and have done whatever she told me,
and all would have been well."
"Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it.
Sonya, for there is nothing but good in her."
"Then it's all right?" said Nicholas, again scrutinizing the
expression of his sister's face to see if she was in earnest. Then
sleigh. The same happy, smiling Circassian, with mustache and
there, and that Circassian was Sonya, and that Sonya was certainly his
future happy and loving wife.
spent the evening at the Melyukovs', the girls went to their
mustaches, they sat a long time talking of their happiness. They
talked of how they would live when they were married, how their
husbands would be friends, and how happy they would be. On Natasha's
table stood two looking glasses which Dunyasha had prepared
beforehand.
Natasha lit the candles, one on each side of one of the looking
"I see someone with a mustache," said Natasha, seeing her own face.
"You mustn't laugh, Miss," said Dunyasha.
into the right position opposite the other; her face assumed a serious
receding line of candles reflected in the glasses and expecting
to take the smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin,
she saw nothing. She began blinking rapidly and moved away from the
looking glasses.
now, Sonya. You absolutely must, tonight! Do it for me.... Today I
feel so frightened!"
For about three minutes all were silent.
suddenly Sonya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered her
"Oh, Natasha!" she cried.
"Did you see? Did you? What was it?" exclaimed Natasha, holding up
the looking glass.
get up when she heard Natasha say, "Of course she will!" She did not
wish to disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha, but it was hard to
"You saw him?" urged Natasha, seizing her hand.
"Yes. Wait a bit... I... saw him," Sonya could not help saying,
not yet knowing whom Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew.
"But why shouldn't I say I saw something? Others do see! Besides who
can tell whether I saw anything or not?" flashed through Sonya's mind.
"Yes, I saw him," she said.
"How? Standing or lying?"
"No, I saw... At first there was nothing, then I saw him lying
"Andrew lying? Is he ill?" asked Natasha, her frightened eyes
fixed on her friend.
turned to me." And when saying this she herself fancied she had really
seen what she described.
"Well, and then, Sonya?..."
red..."
"Sonya! When will he come back? When shall I see him! O, God, how
afraid I am for him and for myself and about everything!..." Natasha
bed, and long after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless,
CHAPTER XIII
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his
love for Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her. The countess, who
declaration, listened to him in silence and then told her son that
would give their blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, for the
first time, felt that his mother was displeased with him and that,
despite her love for him, she would not give way. Coldly, without
tried briefly and coldly to inform him of the facts, in her son's
presence, but unable to restrain herself she burst into tears of
admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his purpose. Nicholas replied
that he could not go back on his word, and his father, sighing and
conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted the family
was only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had
have been wished for, and that no one but himself with his Mitenka and
his uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the
family finances.
again, but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and, with a
catch Nicholas and for ingratitude. Sonya listened silently with
downcast eyes to the countess' cruel words, without understanding what
was required of her. She was ready to sacrifice everything for her
benefactors. Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this
case she could not see what she ought to sacrifice, or for whom. She
happiness depended on that love. She was silent and sad and did not
reply. Nicholas felt the situation to be intolerable and went to
have an explanation with his mother. He first implored her to
threatened that if she molested Sonya he would at once marry her
secretly.
The countess, with a coldness her son had never seen in her
would never receive that intriguer as her daughter.
Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, told
his mother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell his
feelings, but if that were so, he would say for the last time....
But he had no time to utter the decisive word which the expression
of his face caused his mother to await with terror, and which would
not time to say it, for Natasha, with a pale and set face, entered the
"Mamma darling, it's not at all so... my poor, sweet darling," she
rupture gazed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy and
excitement of the conflict could not and would not give way.
"Nicholas, I'll explain to you. Go away! Listen, Mamma darling,"
said Natasha.
Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which
she was aiming.
The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face on her daughter's
breast, while Nicholas rose, clutching his head, and left the room.
Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation, and so far succeeded
be troubled, while he on his side promised not to undertake anything
without his parents' knowledge.
Firmly resolved, after putting his affairs in order in the regiment,
to retire from the army and return and marry Sonya, Nicholas, serious,
sorrowful, and at variance with his parents, but, as it seemed to him,
passionately in love, left at the beginning of January to rejoin his
regiment.
After Nicholas had gone things in the Rostov household were more
Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more
and estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold, and for this they
had to go to Moscow. But the countess' health obliged them to delay
their departure from day to day.
betrothed lightly and even cheerfully, now grew more agitated and
have employed in loving him, were being vainly wasted, with no
advantage to anyone, tormented her incessantly. His letters for the
most part irritated her. It hurt her to think that while she lived
only in the thought of him, he was living a real life, seeing new
letters were the more vexed she felt. Her letters to him, far from
giving her any comfort, seemed to her a wearisome and artificial
obligation. She could not write, because she could not conceive the
formal, monotonous, and dry letters, to which she attached no
importance herself, and in the rough copies of which the countess
There was still no improvement in the countess' health, but it was
impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer. Natasha's
Andrew was expected in Moscow, where old Prince Bolkonski was spending
So the countess remained in the country, and the count, taking Sonya
and Natasha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.
BOOK EIGHT: 1811 --12
CHAPTER I
apparent cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as
before. Firmly convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by
man, to which he had devoted himself with such ardor--all the zest
of such a life vanished after the engagement of Andrew and Natasha and
the death of Joseph Alexeevich, the news of which reached him almost
brilliant wife who now enjoyed the favors of a very important
with its dull formalities. And this life suddenly seemed to Pierre
unexpectedly loathsome. He ceased keeping a diary, avoided the company
of the Brothers, began going to the Club again, drank a great deal,
and came once more in touch with the bachelor sets, leading such a
to him about it. Pierre felt that she right, and to avoid compromising
her went away to Moscow.
and fading princesses still lived, with its enormous retinue; as
soon as, driving through the town, he saw the Iberian shrine with
innumerable tapers burning before the golden covers of the icons,
the Kremlin Square with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the sleigh
desired nothing, hurried nowhere, and were ending their days
and the English Club, he felt himself at home in a quiet haven. In
Moscow he felt at peace, at home, warm and dirty as in an old dressing
gown.
Pierre like a long-expected guest whose place was always ready
most intellectual, merriest, and most magnanimous of cranks, a
heedless, genial nobleman of the old Russian type. His purse was
always empty because it was open to everyone.
Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent
societies, gypsy choirs, schools, subscription dinners, sprees,
Freemasons, churches, and books--no one and nothing met with a refusal
from him, and had it not been for two friends who had borrowed large
sums from him and taken him under their protection, he would have
given everything away. There was never a dinner or soiree at the
Club without him. As soon as he sank into his place on the sofa
disputing, and joking began. When there were quarrels, his kindly
smile and well-timed jests reconciled the antagonists. The Masonic
dinners were dull and dreary when he was not there.
When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly
married and unmarried, liked him because without making love to any of
them, he was equally amiable to all, especially after supper. "Il
est charmant; il n'a pas de sexe,"* they said of him.
*"He is charming; he has no sex."
Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there
to seek or plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternally
predetermined, and that wriggle as he might, he would be what all in
his position were. He could not have believed it! Had he not at one
time longed with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia; then
himself to be a Napoleon; then to be a philosopher; and then a
strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the
perfection? Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated
his serfs?
drinking and, as he unbuttoned his waistcoat, of abusing the
favorite in Moscow society. For a long time he could not reconcile
gentlemen-in-waiting he had so despised seven years before.
In moments of pride, when he thought of his position it seemed to
him that he was quite different and distinct from those other
retired gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised: they were
empty, stupid, contented fellows, satisfied with their position,
"while I am still discontented and want to do something for mankind.
But perhaps all these comrades of mine struggled just like me and
brought by force of circumstances, society, and race--by that
elemental force against which man is powerless--to the condition I
am in," said he to himself in moments of humility; and after living
some time in Moscow he no longer despised, but began to grow fond
himself.
Pierre longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgust
with life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in such
acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment.
experience that there were no answers to these questions he made haste
Club or to Apollon Nikolaevich's, to exchange the gossip of the town.
one of the stupidest women in the world," thought Pierre, "is regarded
by people as the acme of intelligence and refinement, and they pay
was great, but now that he has become a wretched comedian the
Emperor Francis wants to offer him his daughter in an illegal
to God for their victory over the French on the fourteenth of June,
and the French, also through the Catholic clergy, offer praise because
brother Masons swear by the blood that they are ready to sacrifice
everything for their neighbor, but they do not give a ruble each to
against the Manna Seekers, and fuss about an authentic Scotch carpet
who wrote it does not understand. We all profess the Christian law
of forgiveness of injuries and love of our neighbors, the law in honor
of which we have built in Moscow forty times forty churches--but
yesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a minister of that
this general deception which everyone accepts, accustomed as he was to
it, astonished him each time as if it were something new. "I
understand the deception and confusion," he thought, "but how am I
to tell them all that I see? I have tried, and have always found
and only try not to see it. So it appears that it must be so! But I-
what is to become of me?" thought he. He had the unfortunate
capacity many men, especially Russians, have of seeing and believing
in the possibility of goodness and truth, but of seeing the evil and
falsehood of life too clearly to be able to take a serious part in it.
Every sphere of work was connected, in his eyes, with evil and
deception. Whatever he tried to be, whatever he engaged in, the evil
under the burden of these insoluble problems, so he abandoned
every kind of society, drank much, bought pictures, engaged in
He read, and read everything that came to hand. On coming home,
while his valets were still taking off his things, he picked up a book
to gossip in drawing rooms of the Club, from gossip to carousals and
women; from carousals back to gossip, reading, and wine. Drinking
became more and more a physical and also a moral necessity. Though the
poured several glasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth he
felt a pleasant warmth in his body, an amiability toward all his
fellows, and a readiness to respond superficially to every idea
without probing it deeply. Only after emptying a bottle or two did
had terrified him was not as dreadful as he had thought. He was always
conscious of some aspect of that skein, as with a buzzing in his
head after dinner or supper he chatted or listened to conversation
doesn't matter. I'll get it unraveled. I have a solution ready, but
have no time now--I'll think it all out later on!" But the later on
never came.
In the morning, on an empty stomach, all the old questions
appeared as insoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily
picked up a book, and if anyone came to see him he was glad.
Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when
hard to find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger. To
some in ambition, some in cards, some in framing laws, some in
sport, some in wine, and some in governmental affairs. "Nothing is
trivial, and nothing is important, it's all the same--only to save
oneself from it as best one can," thought Pierre. "Only not to see it,
that dreadful it!"
CHAPTER II
daughter moved to Moscow. At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor
tendency prevailed there, and this, together with his past and his
intellect and his originality, at once made Prince Nicholas
Bolkonski an object of particular respect to the Moscovites and the
The prince had aged very much that year. He showed marked signs of
senility by a tendency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite recent
he accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of
in his old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused by anyone,
told his abrupt stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt and
house with its gigantic mirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powdered
century) with his gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who
were reverently devoted to him presented a majestic and agreeable
spectacle. But the visitors did not reflect that besides the couple of
house continued.
Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary.
There in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures--talks with
go out into society; everyone knew that her father would not let her
saw the coldness and malevolence with which the old prince received
appeared at their house. She had no friends: during this visit to
her. Mademoiselle Bourienne, with whom she had never been able to be
whirl of society pleasures. She was surrounded by young men who, she
fancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth. Julie was at
that stage in the life of a society woman when she feels that her last
chance of marrying has come and that her fate must be decided now or
that she now had no one to write to, since Julie--whose presence
gave her no pleasure was here and they met every week. Like the old
emigre who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent his
evenings for years, she regretted Julie's presence and having no one
then. The time for Prince Andrew's return and marriage was
approaching, but his request to her to prepare his father for it had
hand, she sat down to show him the French alphabet, she so longed to
pour her own knowledge quickly and easily into the child--who was
already afraid that Auntie might at any moment get angry--that at
his slightest inattention she trembled, became flustered and heated,
cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas, following her
what distressed the princess most of all was her father's
amounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate herself to the
ground all night, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water,
it would never have entered her mind to think her position hard; but
humiliate her deliberately, but to show her that she was always to
blame for everything. Of late he had exhibited a new trait that
the first moment of receiving the news of his son's intentions had
marry Bourienne--had evidently pleased him, and latterly he had
persistently, and as it seemed to Princess Mary merely to offend
her, shown special endearments to the companion and expressed his
dissatisfaction with his daughter by demonstrations of love of
Bourienne.
Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand and, drawing her to him, embraced her
smiling and making cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Princess
Mary hastily wiped away her tears, went resolutely up to
doing began shouting in angry haste at the Frenchwoman, her voice
Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter, but she
and from habit began with the princess, the prince suddenly grew
have him conscripted for the army.
"He doesn't obey... I said it twice... and he doesn't obey! She is
prince. "And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressing
house. Go! Don't let me set eyes on you; beg her pardon!"
father's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had begged
for her intervention.
her soul. And suddenly that father whom she had judged would look
for his spectacles in her presence, fumbling near them and not
a false step with his failing legs and turn to see if anyone had
noticed his feebleness, or, worst of all, at dinner when there were no
napkin drop and his shaking head sink over his plate. "He is old and
feeble, and I dare to condemn him!" she thought at such moments,
had rapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome,
amiable as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an
not merely as a doctor, but as an equal.
Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly on
Mademoiselle Bourienne's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him
no one and to invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whom
Metivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, considered
it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne,* as he
told Princess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It happened that on
that morning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods.
everyone and pretending not to understand what was said to him and not
to be understood himself. Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet
absorbed querulousness, which generally culminated in a burst of rage,
and she went about all that morning as though facing a cocked and
loaded gun and awaited the inevitable explosion. Until the doctor's
Princess Mary sat down with a book in the drawing room near the door
through which she could hear all that passed in the study.
*To force the guard.
At first she heard only Metivier's voice, then her father's, then
both voices began speaking at the same time, the door was flung
open, and on the threshold appeared the handsome figure of the
terrified Metivier with his shock of black hair, and the prince in his
dressing gown and fez, his face distorted with fury and the pupils
"You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do! French spy,
slave of Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you..."
Metivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne
who at the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room.
"The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head.
fingers to his lips he hastened away.
Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry:
After Metivier's departure the old prince called his daughter in,
said, he could not have a moment's peace and could not die quietly.
understand it! I cannot endure any more," he said, and left the
room. Then, as if afraid she might find some means of consolation,
it will be carried out--we must part; so find some place for
yourself...." But he could not restrain himself and with the virulence
sent for Mademoiselle Bourienne, and subsided into his study.
his nephew, General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and of
the younger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy--awaited the prince
contrived to ingratiate himself so well that the old prince in his
house.
society, but his little circle--though not much talked about in
town--was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other.
his presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St. Nicholas' Day, and
Rostopchin had replied that he could not come:
Nicholas Bolkonski."
The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty
gathering of a court of justice. All were silent or talked in low
tones. Prince Nicholas came in serious and taciturn. Princess Mary
seemed even quieter and more diffident than usual. The guests were
conversation. Count Rostopchin alone kept the conversation going,
gossip.
Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in the
receives a report, only now and then, silently or by a brief word,
showing that he took heed of what was being reported to him. The
tone of the conversation was such as indicated that no one approved of
what was being done in the political world. Incidents were related
evidently confirming the opinion that everything was going from bad to
always stopped, or was stopped, at the point beyond which his
seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note,
hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.
before. "One only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the
scruple to depose the head of the Catholic Church--yet all keep
silent! Our sovereign alone has protested against the seizure of the
Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and even..." Count Rostopchin paused,
feeling that he had reached the limit beyond which censure was
impossible.
"Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy of
Oldenburg," said Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes about as I
might move my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan
estates."
"The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength
respectfully.
mind, evidently considering him too young.
"I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was
surprised how badly the Note was worded," remarked Count Rostopchin in
the casual tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him.
Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment, not
Note.
"Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "so
"My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it should
of the Note.
"One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up,"
remarked the old prince. "There in Petersburg they are always writing-
not notes only but even new laws. My Andrew there has written a
whole volume of laws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writing!"
There was a momentary pause in the conversation; the old general
cleared his throat to draw attention.
"Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg? The
figure cut by the new French ambassador."
"Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said something awkward in His
Majesty's presence."
march past," continued the general, "and it seems the ambassador
attention to such trifles!' The Emperor did not condescend to reply.
All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor personally, it
was impossible to pass any judgment.
"Impudent fellows!" said the prince. "You know Metivier? I turned
him out of my house this morning. He was here; they admitted him spite
of my request that they should let no one in," he went on, glancing
the reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy. Though these
After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose to
congratulate the old prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.
He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled,
clean-shaven cheek to kiss. The whole expression of his face told
her that he had not forgotten the morning's talk, that his decision
remained in force, and only the presence of visitors hindered his
speaking of it to her now.
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the
old men sat together.
Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the
impending war.
He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long
as we sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into
"We ought not to fight either for or against Austria. Our political
never dare to cross the Russian frontier, as was the case in 1807!"
we arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at our
"French dresses, French ideas, French feelings! There now, you
woolwork on Sundays. And they themselves sit there nearly naked,
like the signboards at our Public Baths if I may say so. Ah, when
one looks at our young people, Prince, one would like to take Peter
the Great's old cudgel out of the museum and belabor them in the
Russian way till all the nonsense jumps out of them."
All were silent. The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile
and wagged his head approvingly.
"Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin,
the prince.
hearing him!" said the old prince, keeping hold of the hand and
offering his cheek to be kissed.
Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men's talk and
faultfinding, understood nothing of what she heard; she only
wondered whether the guests had all observed her father's hostile
and amiabilities shown her during dinner by Boris Drubetskoy, who
Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to
"May I stay a little longer?" he said, letting his stout body sink
into an armchair beside her.
"Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed nothing?" her look asked.
Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood. He looked straight
before him and smiled quietly.
"Have you known that young man long, Princess?" he asked.
"Who?"
"Drubetskoy."
"No, not long..."
"Do you like him?"
Princess Mary, still thinking of that morning's conversation with
"Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from
Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an
heiress."
"You have observed that?" said Princess Mary.
siege to--you or Mademoiselle Julie Karagina. He is very attentive
to her."
"He visits them?"
"Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of courting?" said
Pierre with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good
humored raillery for which he so often reproached himself in his
diary.
very melancholy with Mademoiselle Karagina," said Pierre.
"Really?" asked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre's kindly face and
still thinking of her own sorrow. "It would be a relief," thought she,
like to tell everything to Pierre. He is kind and generous. It would
be a relief. He would give me advice."
she cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice.
one thing left--to go away, but where could I go?"
"What is wrong? What is it, Princess?"
But without finishing what she was saying, Princess Mary burst
into tears.
"I don't know what is the matter with me today. Don't take any
notice--forget what I have said!"
princess, asked her to speak out fully and confide her grief to him;
but she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said,
that she did not remember what she had said, and that she had no
trouble except the one he knew of--that Prince Andrew's marriage
threatened to cause a rupture between father and son.
Princess Mary shook her head.
thing is impossible. I only wish I could spare my brother the first
moments. I wish they would come sooner. I hope to be friends with her.
You have known them a long time," said Princess Mary. "Tell me
much doing this against his father's will that I should like to
know..."
An undefined instinct told Pierre that these explanations, and
repeated requests to be told the whole truth, expressed ill-will on
the princess' part toward her future sister-in-law and a wish that
he should disapprove of Andrew's choice; but in reply he said what
he felt rather than what he thought.
without knowing why. "I really don't know what sort of girl she is;
I can't analyze her at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so I
don't know. That is all one can say about her."
"Is she clever?" she asked.
"Ah, I so long to like her! Tell her so if you see her before I do."
"I hear they are expected very soon," said Pierre.
Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her
future sister-in-law as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to
accustom the old prince to her.
CHAPTER V
Boris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg,
so with the same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered
between the two richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Though
Princess Mary despite her plainness seemed to him more attractive than
Julie, he, without knowing why, felt awkward about paying court to
her. When they had last met on the old prince's name day, she had
not listening to what he was saying.
manner peculiar to herself.
She was twenty-seven. After the death of her brothers she had become
very wealthy. She was by now decidedly plain, but thought herself
not merely as good-looking as before but even far more attractive. She
was confirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had become a
the less dangerous she became to men, and the more freely they could
the animated company that assembled at her house, without incurring
going every day to the house when there was a girl of seventeen there,
boldly every day and treat her not as a marriageable girl but as a
sexless acquaintance.
That winter the Karagins' house was the most agreeable and
parties, a large company, chiefly of men, gathered there every day,
missed a ball, a promenade, or a play. Her dresses were always of
the latest fashion. But in spite of that she seemed to be
disillusioned about everything and told everyone that she did not
believe either in friendship or in love, or any of the joys of life,
has suffered a great disappointment, like a girl who has either lost
This melancholy, which did not prevent her amusing herself, did not
hinder the young people who came to her house from passing the time
pleasantly. Every visitor who came to the house paid his tribute to
the melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amused himself with
society gossip, dancing, intellectual games, and bouts rimes, which
were in vogue at the Karagins'. Only a few of these young men, among
these she had prolonged conversations in private on the vanity of
all worldly things, and to them she showed her albums filled with
mournful sketches, maxims, and verses.
To Boris, Julie was particularly gracious: she regretted his early
friendship as she who had herself suffered so much could render, and
On another page he drew a tomb, and wrote:
    La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille.
    Ah! contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile.*
*Death gives relief and death is peaceful.
 Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.
Julia said this was charming
"There is something so enchanting in the smile of melancholy," she
said to Boris, repeating word for word a passage she had copied from a
book. "It is a ray of light in the darkness, a shade between sadness
    Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible,
    Toi, sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible,
    Tendre melancholie, ah, viens me consoler,
    Viens calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite,
    Et mele une douceur secrete
    A ces pleurs que je sens couler.*
 Thou, without whom happiness would for me be impossible,
 And mingle a secret sweetness
For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Boris
gatherings Julie and Boris looked on one another as the only souls who
Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karagins, while playing
cards with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry
(she was to have two estates in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests).
Anna Mikhaylovna regarded the refined sadness that united her son to
the daughter. "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house. He
has suffered so many disappointments and is so sensitive," said she to
Julie latterly," she said to her son. "But who could help loving
her? She is an angelic being! Ah, Boris, Boris!"--she paused. "And how
I pity her mother," she went on; "today she showed me her accounts and
thing, has no one to help her, and they do cheat her so!"
Nizhegorod estates.
Julie had long been expecting a proposal from her melancholy
repulsion for her, for her passionate desire to get married, for her
artificiality, and a feeling of horror at renouncing the possibility
of real love still restrained Boris. His leave was expiring. He
thinking the matter over told himself that he would propose
tomorrow. But in Julie's presence, looking at her red face and chin
(nearly always powdered), her moist eyes, and her expression of
continual readiness to pass at once from melancholy to an unnatural
though in imagination he had long regarded himself as the possessor of
those Penza and Nizhegorod estates and had apportioned the use of
the income from them. Julie saw Boris' indecision, and sometimes the
feminine self-deception immediately supplied her with consolation, and
of absence was expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his appearance in
Moscow, and of course in the Karagins' drawing room, and Julie,
"My dear," said Anna Mikhaylovna to her son, "I know from a reliable
married to Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for
all the revenue from the Penza estates which he had already mentally
Julie met him in a gay, careless manner, spoke casually of how she had
inconstancy, of how easily women can turn from sadness to joy, and how
their moods depend solely on who happens to be paying court to them.
Julie was offended and replied that it was true that a woman needs
"Then I should advise you..." Boris began, wishing to sting her; but
at that instant the galling thought occurred to him that he might have
wasted his efforts--which was a thing he never allowed to happen.
to avoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and
"I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary..."
He glanced at her to make sure that he might go on. Her irritability
had suddenly quite vanished, and her anxious, imploring eyes were
fixed on him with greedy expectation. "I can always arrange so as
not to see her often," thought Boris. "The affair has been begun and
"You know my feelings for you!"
self-satisfaction; but she forced Boris to say all that is said on
such occasions--that he loved her and had never loved any other
woman more than her. She knew that for the Penza estates and
Nizhegorod forests she could demand this, and she received what she
The affianced couple, no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom
in Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared everything for a brilliant
wedding.
CHAPTER VI
and Sonya. The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it
was impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected in
Moscow any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate near
future daughter-in-law to old Prince Bolkonski while he was in
Moscow could not be missed. The Rostovs' Moscow house had not been
countess was not with them, the count decided to stay with Marya
Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, who had long been pressing her hospitality
Late one evening the Rostovs' four sleighs drove into Marya
She held herself as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly,
to others for any weakness, passion, or temptation--the possibility of
jacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she drove out:
on holy days to church and after the service to jails and prisons on
affairs of which she never spoke to anyone. On ordinary days, after
were always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizing
meal at which there were always three or four guests; after dinner she
new book read to her while she knitted. She rarely made an exception
She had not yet gone to bed when the Rostovs arrived and the
doorway looking with a stern, grim face at the new arrivals. One might
have thought she was angry with the travelers and would immediately
turn them out, had she not at the same time been giving careful
instructions to the servants for the accommodation of the visitors and
their belongings.
portmanteaus and not greeting anyone. "The young ladies'? There to the
left. Now what are you dawdling for?" she cried to the maids. "Get the
the hood. "Foo! You are cold! Now take off your things, quick!" she
shouted to the count who was going to kiss her hand. "You're half
When they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor things
and tidied themselves up after their journey, Marya Dmitrievna
kissed them all in due order.
"I'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me. It was
high time," she said, giving Natasha a significant look. "The old
man is here and his son's expected any day. You'll have to make his
Sonya with a look that showed she did not want to speak of it in her
presence. "Now listen," she said to the count. "What do you want
tomorrow? Whom will you send for? Shinshin?" she crooked one of her
here too, with his wife. He ran away from her and she came galloping
after him. He dined with me on Wednesday. As for them"--and she
pointed to the girls--"tomorrow I'll take them first to the Iberian
me: sleeves nowadays are this size! The other day young Princess Irina
Vasilevna came to see me; she was an awful sight--looked as if she had
some new fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?" she asked
the count sternly.
"One thing has come on top of another: her rags to buy, and now a
purchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If
for a day, and leave my lassies with you."
Chancery! I'll take them where they must go, scold them a bit, and pet
them a bit," said Marya Dmitrievna, touching her goddaughter and
favorite, Natasha, on the cheek with her large hand.
shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was so
afraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at
a loss merely to get rid of her. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the
"Well, now we'll talk. I congratulate you on your betrothed.
You've hooked a fine fellow! I am glad for your sake and I've known
child and can shift without him, but it's not nice to enter a family
You're a clever girl and you'll know how to manage. Be kind, and use
your wits. Then all will be well."
love of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human
Andrew, he loved her only, and was to come one of these days and
take her. She wanted nothing more.
this one wouldn't hurt a fly. She has asked me to bring you two
Am I right or not? Won't that be best?"
CHAPTER VII
call on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski. The count did not set out
remembered the last interview he had had with the old prince at the
time of the enrollment, when in reply to an invitation to dinner he
had had to listen to an angry reprimand for not having provided his
father--and of her--for being his sister--that there is no reason
They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka and
entered the vestibule.
half in earnest; but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried on
prince and princess were at home.
When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among the
servants. The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped by
another in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then a
to the Rostovs that the prince was not receiving, but that the
princess begged them to walk up. The first person who came to meet the
visitors was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the father and
daughter with special politeness and showed them to the princess'
trying to appear cordial and at ease. From the first glance Princess
Mary did not like Natasha. She thought her too fashionably dressed,
frivolously gay and vain. She did not at all realize that before
having seen her future sister-in-law she was prejudiced against her by
jealousy of her brother's love for her. Apart from this insuperable
the Rostovs' being announced, the old prince had shouted that he did
"There, my dear princess, I've brought you my songstress," said
prince might appear. "I am so glad you should get to know one
another... very sorry the prince is still ailing," and after a few
more commonplace remarks he rose. "If you'll allow me to leave my
Natasha in your hands for a quarter of an hour, Princess, I'll drive
round to see Anna Semenovna, it's quite near in the Dogs' Square,
and then I'll come back for her."
The count had devised this diplomatic ruse (as he afterwards told
his daughter) to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk
angrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold
and defiant expression which said that she was not afraid of
anybody. The princess told the count that she would be delighted,
and only begged him to stay longer at Anna Semenovna's, and he
departed.
Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary--who
wished to have a tete-a-tete with Natasha--Mademoiselle Bourienne
remained in the room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements
and theaters. Natasha felt offended by the hesitation she had
noticed in the anteroom, by her father's nervousness, and by the
unnatural manner of the princess who--she thought--was making a
favor of receiving her, and so everything displeased her. She did
not like Princess Mary, whom she thought very plain, affected, and
dry. Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and involuntarily assumed an
offhand air which alienated Princess Mary still more. After five
minutes of irksome, constrained conversation, they heard the sound
of slippered feet rapidly approaching. Princess Mary looked
The door opened and the old prince, in a dress, ing gown and a white
a visit, and I came in such a costume only to see my daughter. I beg
you to excuse me... God is my witness, I didn't know-" he repeated,
stressing the word "God" so unnaturally and so unpleasantly that
her father or at Natasha.
Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after this
apparition and began speaking about the prince's indisposition.
grew their antipathy to one another.
to get away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who
could place her in such an embarrassing position and had spent half an
talking about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman," thought
because, without knowing why, she felt it very difficult to speak of
Natasha glanced at her ironically without knowing why.
glad my brother has found happiness...."
She paused, feeling that she was not telling the truth. Natasha
noticed this and guessed its reason.
"I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now,"
she said with external dignity and coldness, though she felt the tears
"What have I said and what have I done?" thought she, as soon as she
She sat in her room crying like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing.
"But if you only knew how offensive it was... as if I..."
"It's my fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why doesn't he
come?..."
She came in to dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who knew
how the prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice how
upset Natasha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the
count and the other guests.
Dmitrievna had taken a box.
Dmitrievna's kind offer which was intended expressly for her. When she
came ready dressed into the ballroom to await her father, and
differently. I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would simply
embrace him, cling to him, and make him look at me with those
I see those eyes!" thought Natasha. "And what do his father and sister
think of him; not think of him but forget him, quite forget him for
in quite ready, with a fan in her hand. "No, she's altogether
different. I can't!"
Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was not
enough for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at
once, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words
of love such as filled her heart. While she sat in the carriage beside
her father, pensively watching the lights of the street lamps
love, and forgot where she was going and with whom. Having fallen into
the line of carriages, the Rostovs' carriage drove up to the
by the footmen, and, passing among men and women who were entering and
audible.
An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies and
opened the door of their box. The music sounded louder and through the
before their eyes. A lady entering the next box shot a glance of
A sensation she had not experienced for a long time--that of
hundreds of eyes looking at her bare arms and neck--suddenly
affected her both agreeably and disagreeably and called up a whole
crowd of memories, desires and emotions associated with that feeling.
The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and Sonya, with Count
Rostov who had not been seen in Moscow for a long time, attracted
the country ever since, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancee who
was making one of the best matches in Russia.
Natasha's looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the
pretty. She struck those who saw her by her fullness of life and
beauty, combined with her indifference to everything about her. Her
black eyes looked at the crowd without seeking anyone, and her
delicate arm, bare to above the elbow, lay on the velvet edge of the
box, while, evidently unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in
said Sonya, "with her mother, isn't it?"
the count.
"Look at our Anna Mikhaylovna--what a headdress she has on!"
"The Karagins, Julie--and Boris with them. One can see at once
that they're engaged...."
"Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, coming into the
Rostovs' box.
smoothly brushed head. He looked the Rostovs from under his brows
and said something, smiling, to his betrothed.
"They are talking about us, about me and him!" thought Natasha. "And
he no doubt is calming her jealousy of me. They needn't trouble
them."
Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing a green headdress and
Natasha knew so well and liked so much. She turned away and suddenly
remembered all that had been so humiliating in her morning's visit.
"What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh,
better not think of it--not till he comes back!" she told herself, and
began looking at the faces, some strange and some familiar, in the
stalls. In the front, in the very center, leaning back against the
brushed up into a huge shock. He stood in full view of the audience,
ease as though he were in his own room. Around him thronged Moscow's
most brilliant young men, whom he evidently dominated.
The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to her
former adorer.
he asked, turning to Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?"
"He did," replied Shinshin. "He was in the Caucasus and ran away
from there. They say he has been acting as minister to some ruling
prince in Persia, where he killed the Shah's brother. Now all the
Moscow ladies are mad about him! It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that does
they offer him to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet. Dolokhov
and Anatole Kuragin have turned all our ladies' heads."
plump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double string
of large pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk
Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and
pearls and coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the
pearls. While Natasha was fixing her gaze on her for the second time
the lady looked round and, meeting the count's eyes, nodded to him and
count, who knew everyone in society, leaned over and spoke to her.
"Have you been here long, Countess?" he inquired. "I'll call, I'll
"Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helene, and glanced attentively
at Natasha.
"Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha.
"Wonderful!" answered Natasha. "She's a woman one could easily
Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the
conductor tapped with his stick. Some latecomers took their seats in
and all the men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, and
attention with eager curiosity to the stage. Natasha too began to look
CHAPTER IX
was some painted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was a
in red bodices and white skirts. One very fat girl in a white silk
dress sat apart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece of
green cardboard was glued. They all sang something. When they had
finished their song the girl in white went up to the prompter's box
and a man with tight silk trousers over his stout legs, and holding
fingered the hand of the girl in white, obviously awaiting the beat to
start singing with her. They sang together and everyone in the theater
all this seemed grotesque and amazing to Natasha. She could not follow
cardboard and the queerly dressed men and women who moved, spoke,
and sang so strangely in that brilliant light. She knew what it was
all meant to represent, but it was so pretentiously false and
at them. She looked at the faces of the audience, seeking in them
the same sense of ridicule and perplexity she herself experienced, but
expressed delight which to Natasha seemed feigned. "I suppose it has
to be like this!" she thought. She kept looking round in turn at the
rows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then at the seminude women
in the boxes, especially at Helene in the next box, who--apparently
quite unclothed--sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not taking her
little began to pass into a state of intoxication she had not
was, nor what was going on before her. As she looked and thought,
the strangest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly passed through
touch with her fan an old gentleman sitting not far from her, then
creaked, and the steps of a belated arrival were heard. "There's
Kuragin!" whispered Shinshin. Countess Bezukhova turned smiling to the
self-assured yet courteous bearing. This was Anatole Kuragin whom
now in an adjutant's uniform with one epaulet and a shoulder knot.
had he not been so good-looking and had his handsome face not worn
such an expression of good-humored complacency and gaiety. Though
carpeted gangway, his sword and spurs slightly jingling and his
handsome perfumed head held high. Having looked at Natasha he
motion toward Natasha.
not exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of
his lips. Then he took his place in the first row of the stalls and
offhand way that Dolokhov whom others treated so fawningly. He
winked at him gaily, smiled, and rested his foot against the orchestra
"How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the count. "And
how handsome they both are!"
because he had said she was "charmante."
The first act was over. In the stalls everyone began moving about,
Boris came to the Rostovs' box, received their congratulations
very simply, and raising his eyebrows with an absent-minded smile
conveyed to Natasha and Sonya his fiancee's invitation to her wedding,
and went away. Natasha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, and
congratulated on his approaching wedding that same Boris with whom she
The scantily clad Helene smiled at everyone in the same way, and
Natasha gave Boris a similar smile.
Helene's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the most
in their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.
During the whole of that entr'acte Kuragin stood with Dolokhov in
knew he was talking about her and this afforded her pleasure. She even
appeared in the stalls. The Rostovs had not seen him since their
Natasha last saw him. He passed up to the front rows, not noticing
her for a long time. While conversing with Pierre, Natasha heard a
man's voice in Countess Bezukhova's box and something told her it
was Kuragin. She turned and their eyes met. Almost smiling, he gazed
straight into her eyes with such an enraptured caressing look that
so sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted with him.
was a round hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades were
raised over the footlights, and from horns and contrabass came deep
notes while many people appeared from right and left wearing black
away the maiden who had been in white and was now in light blue.
time and then at last dragged her off, and behind the scenes something
metallic was struck three times and everyone knelt down and sang a
prayer. All these things were repeatedly interrupted by the
enthusiastic shouts of the audience.
During this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls she
saw Anatole Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair,
staring at her. She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her
When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned to
"Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters," said she. "The
whole town is singing their praises and I don't even know then!"
you're not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"
"Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though I
am not staying here long this time--nor are you--I will try to amuse
them. I have already heard much of you in Petersburg and wanted to get
smile. "I had heard about you from my page, Drubetskoy. Have you heard
he is getting married? And also from my husband's friend Bolkonski,
implying that she knew of his relation to Natasha. To get better
box for the rest of the performance, and Natasha moved over to it.
the walls. In the middle stood what were probably a king and a
queen. The king waved his right arm and, evidently nervous, sang
something badly and sat down on a crimson throne. The maiden who had
been first in white and then in light blue, now wore only a smock, and
stood beside the throne with her hair down. She sang something
mournfully, addressing the queen, but the king waved his arm severely,
and men and women with bare legs came in from both sides and began
one foot rapidly against the other. In the stalls everyone clapped and
shouted "bravo!" Then one of the men went into a corner of the
stage. The cymbals and horns in the orchestra struck up more loudly,
about very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixty thousand rubles
began clapping and shouting with all their might, and the man
stopped and began smiling and bowing to all sides. Then other men
and women danced with bare legs. Then the king again shouted to the
sound of music, and they all began singing. But suddenly a storm
orchestra, everyone ran off, again dragging one of their number
away, and the curtain dropped. Once more there was a terrible noise
and clatter among the audience, and with rapturous faces everyone
began shouting: "Duport! Duport! Duport!" Natasha no longer thought
this strange. She look about with pleasure, smiling joyfully.
During the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's box, the
"Let me introduce my brother to you," said Helene, her eyes shifting
officer and smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who was
as handsome at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her
and told her he had long wished to have this happiness--ever since the
pleasure of seeing her. Kuragin was much more sensible and simple with
was strangely and agreeably struck by the fact that there was
but that on the contrary his smile was most naive, cheerful, and
good-natured.
"And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addressing her as
shall all meet at the Karagins'! Please come! No! Really, eh?" said
he.
her neck, and her bare arms. Natasha knew for certain that he was
constrained and oppressed. When she was not looking at him she felt
that he was looking at her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught his
into his eyes she was frightened, realizing that there was not that
barrier of modesty she had always felt between herself and other
men. She did not know how it was that within five minutes she had come
to feel herself terribly near to this man. When she turned away she
on the neck. They spoke of most ordinary things, yet she felt that
they were closer to one another than she had ever been to any man.
did not answer her look, and her father's eyes said nothing but what
prominent eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natasha, to
break the silence, asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked the
question and blushed. She felt all the time that by talking to him she
was doing something improper. Anatole smiled as though to encourage
"At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant
indeed," he said, looking at her significantly. "You'll come to the
her bouquet and dropping his voice, he added, "You will be the
prettiest there. Do come, dear countess, and give me this flower as
a pledge!"
Natasha did not understand what he was saying any more than he did
himself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an
good-natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her. She smiled just
as he was doing, gazing straight into his eyes. And again she felt
with horror that no barrier lay between him and her.
The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, serene and gay.
Natasha went back to her father in the other box, now quite submissive
now seemed quite natural, but on the other hand all her previous
thoughts of her betrothed, of Princess Mary, or of life in the country
did not once recur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remote
In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his
arm about, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he
leaving the theater Anatole came up to them, called their carriage,
at her with glittering eyes, smiling tenderly.
over what had happened to her, and suddenly remembering Prince
room.
realize what had happened to her, but was unable either to
understand what had happened or what she felt. Everything seemed dark,
obscure, and terrible. There in that enormous, illuminated theater
about to the music on wet boards, and young girls and old men, and the
"bravo!"--there in the presence of that Helene it had all seemed clear
and simple; but now, alone by herself, it was incomprehensible.
gnawing of conscience I am feeling now?" she thought.
Only to the old countess at night in bed could Natasha have told all
such a confession. So Natasha tried to solve what was torturing her by
soothing irony replied: "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happen
to me? Nothing! I have done nothing, I didn't lead him on at all.
Nobody will know and I shall never see him again," she told herself.
"So it is plain that nothing has happened and there is nothing to
isn't he here?" Natasha quieted herself for a moment, but again some
had perished. And again in imagination she went over her whole
Anatole Kuragin was staying in Moscow because his father had sent
rubles a year in cash, besides running up debts for as much more,
His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts for
the last time, but only on condition that he went to Moscow as
adjutant to the commander in chief--a post his father had procured for
him--and would at last try to make a good match there. He indicated to
him Princess Mary and Julie Karagina.
As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole had
turned the heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that
be on intimate relations. He had never missed a carousal at
Danilov's or other Moscow revelers', drank whole nights through,
best society. There was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies,
of them plain. There was a special reason for this, as he had got
friends. At that time while with his regiment in Poland, a Polish
had very soon abandoned his wife and, for a payment which he agreed to
send to his father-in-law, had arranged to be free to pass himself off
as a bachelor.
impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had
considering how his actions might affect others or what the
and always occupy a prominent position in society. He believed this so
firmly that others, looking at him, were persuaded of it too and did
He was not vain. He did not mind what people thought of him. Still
less could he be accused of ambition. More than once he had vexed
his father by spoiling his own career, and he laughed at
anyone who asked of him. All he cared about was gaiety and women,
and as according to his ideas there was nothing dishonorable in
gratification of his tastes entailed for others, he honestly
considered himself irreproachable, sincerely despised rogues and bad
people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his head high.
Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a secret feeling of innocence
of forgiveness. "All will be forgiven her, for she loved much; and all
Dolokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile and
his Persian adventures, and was leading a life of luxury, gambling,
and dissipation, associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kuragin
and made use of him for his own ends.
Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and
made use of him and amused himself at his expense without letting
the other feel it. Apart from the advantage he derived from Anatole,
Natasha had made a strong impression on Kuragin. At supper after the
intention of making love to her. Anatole had no notion and was
"She's first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for us," replied
Dolokhov.
"I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," said Anatole. "Eh?"
"You'd better wait till she's married...."
pursued Anatole.
"You have been caught once already by a 'little girl,'" said
"Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said Anatole, with a
good-humored laugh.
CHAPTER XII
The day after the opera the Rostovs went nowhere and nobody came
to see them. Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about something
about the old prince and planning something, and this disquieted and
offended her. She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice
that day sent a manservant to the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he
Mary and the old prince, and a fear and anxiety of which she did not
understand the cause. She continually fancied that either he would
never come or that something would happen to her before he came. She
could no longer think of him by herself calmly and continuously as she
recollection of the old prince, of Princess Mary, of the theater,
itself whether she was not guilty, whether she had not already
broken faith with Prince Andrew, and again she found herself recalling
to the minutest detail every word, every gesture, and every shade in
the play of expression on the face of the man who had been able to
the family Natasha seemed livelier than usual, but she was far less
tranquil and happy than before.
On Sunday morning Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass at
"I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidently
priding herself on her independence of thought. "God is the same every
where. We have an excellent priest, he conducts the service decently
in giving concerts in the choir? I don't like it, it's just
At her table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had
vodka and roast goose or suckling pig. But in nothing in the house was
the holiday so noticeable as in Marya Dmitrievna's broad, stern
After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in the dining room
where the loose covers had been removed from the furniture, a
servant announced that the carriage was ready, and Marya Dmitrievna
rose with a stern air. She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paid
calls, and announced that she was going to see Prince Nicholas
After she had gone, a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Roguet waited
on the Rostovs, and Natasha, very glad of this diversion, having
herself trying on the new dresses. Just as she had put on a bodice
the animated sounds of her father's voice and another's--a woman's-
that made her flush. It was Helene. Natasha had not time to take off
purple velvet gown with a high collar, came into the room beaming with
good-humored amiable smiles.
"Charming! No, this is really beyond anything, my dear count," said
Moscow and go nowhere? No, I won't let you off! Mademoiselle George
will recite at my house tonight and there'll be some people, and if
would send him to fetch you. You must come. You positively must!
She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsied
which she had received from Paris, and advised Natasha to have one
like it.
"But anything suits you, my charmer!" she remarked.
if she were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess
Bezukhova who had formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and
important and was now so kind to her. Natasha brightened up and felt
Helene for her part was sincerely delighted with Natasha and wished to
give her a good time. Anatole had asked her to bring him and Natasha
idea of throwing her brother and Natasha together amused her.
for drawing Boris away, she did not think of that now, and in her
"My brother dined with me yesterday--we nearly died of laughter-
he ate nothing and kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly,
quite madly, in love with you, my dear."
Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this.
"How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene. "You
must certainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a
reason to shut yourself up. Even if you are engaged, I am sure your
"So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre--that
good Pierre--have talked and laughed about this. So it's all right."
And again, under Helene's influence, what had seemed terrible now
Natasha, gazing at Helene with wide-open, wondering eyes.
agitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly.
In answer to the count's inquiries she replied that things were all
right and that she would tell about it next day. On hearing of
Countess Bezukhova's visit and the invitation for that evening,
Marya Dmitrievna remarked:
"I don't care to have anything to do with Bezukhova and don't advise
you to; however, if you've promised--go. It will divert your
thoughts," she added, addressing Natasha.
CHAPTER XIII
good many people there, but nearly all strangers to Natasha. Count
entirely of men and women known for the freedom of their conduct.
them Metivier who from the time Helene reached Moscow had been an
George's performance was over.
Anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the Rostovs.
Immediately after greeting the count he went up to Natasha and
her beauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George
went out of the room to change her costume. In the drawing room people
began arranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved a
chair for Natasha and was about to sit down beside her, but the count,
behind her.
Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience
and began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for
her son. In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered,
"Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.
understood anything of what went on before her. She only felt
know what was good or bad, reasonable or senseless. Behind her sat
Anatole, and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened
sense of expectancy.
After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded
Mademoiselle George, expressing their enthusiasm.
"How beautiful she is!" Natasha remarked to her father who had
"You are enchanting... from the moment I saw you I have never
ceased..."
daughter. "How beautiful she is!" Natasha without saying anything
After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, and
Countess Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.
The count wished to go home, but Helene entreated him not to spoil
her improvised ball, and the Rostovs stayed on. Anatole asked
Natasha for a valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand
and told her she was bewitching and that he loved her. During the
ecossaise, which she also danced with him, Anatole said nothing when
tenderness in his affectionate look and smile that she could not,
"Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he. "I tell you I
am madly, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you are
enchanting?... It's our turn to begin."
frightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardly
anything that went on that evening. They danced the ecossaise and
remain. Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to, she felt
his eyes upon her. Later on she recalled how she had asked her
father to let her go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress, that
and that she again met Anatole in the little sitting room. Helene
had disappeared leaving them alone, and Anatole had taken her hand and
said in a tender voice:
brought his face close to hers.
His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she
saw nothing but them.
"Natalie?" he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being
Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she
felt herself released, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of her
dress were heard in the room. Natasha looked round at her, and then,
red and trembling, threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and
moved toward the door.
"One word, just one, for God's sake!" cried Anatole.
She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would explain to
her what had happened and to which she could find no answer.
After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night. She was
Prince Andrew. She loved Prince Andrew--she remembered distinctly
"If, after that, I could return his smile when saying good-by, if I
too?" she asked herself, unable to find an answer to these terrible
CHAPTER XIV
Morning came with its cares and bustle. Everyone got up and began to
move about and talk, dressmakers came again. Marya Dmitrievna
appeared, and they were called to breakfast. Natasha kept looking
my advice," she began. "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince
Bolkonski. Well, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head to
begin shouting, but I am not one to be shouted down. I said what I had
to say!"
"Well, and he?" asked the count.
"He? He's crazy... he did not want to listen. But what's the use
of talking? As it is we have worn the poor girl out," said Marya
to Otradnoe... and wait there."
"Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha.
betrothed comes here now--there will be no avoiding a quarrel; but
alone with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to
Count Rostov approved of this suggestion, appreciating its
reasonableness. If the old man came round it would be all the better
"That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and took
her," said the old count.
if he won't--that's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, looking for
there is nothing to wait for; and what is not ready I'll send after
"She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She's
afraid you might think that she does not like you."
"But she doesn't like me," said Natasha.
"Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna.
"I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't like me," replied
Natasha boldly as she took the letter, and her face expressed a cold
"Don't answer like that, my good girl!" she said. "What I say is
true! Write an answer!" Natasha did not reply and went to her own room
misunderstanding that had occurred between them. Whatever her father's
happiness she was ready to sacrifice everything.
"Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father is
ill-disposed toward you. He is an invalid and an old man who must be
After reading the letter Natasha sat down at the writing table to
answer it. "Dear Princess," she wrote in French quickly and
that had happened the evening before? "Yes, yes! All that has
letter she had begun before her. "Must I break off with him? Must I
really? That's awful..." and to escape from these dreadful thoughts
After dinner Natasha went to her room and again took up Princess
former strength, and at the same time felt that she loved Kuragin. She
"Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked herself in
complete bewilderment. "Only so could I be completely happy; but now I
she thought, "to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide it
spoiled. But am I really to abandon forever the joy of Prince Andrew's
love, in which I have lived so long?"
"Please, Miss!" whispered a maid entering the room with a mysterious
"Only, for Christ's sake..." the girl went on, as Natasha, without
Anatole, of which, without taking in a word, she understood only
that it was a letter from him--from the man she loved. Yes, she
loved him, or else how could that have happened which had happened?
With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate love letter
which Dolokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she
found in it an echo of all that she herself imagined she was feeling.
"Since yesterday evening my fate has been sealed; to be loved by you
or to die. There is no other way for me," the letter began. Then he
went on to say that he knew her parents would not give her to him--for
this there were secret reasons he could reveal only to her--but that
could hinder their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would steal her
away and carry her off to the ends of the earth.
the twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each
word of it.
proposed to take the girls with her. Natasha, pleading a headache,
CHAPTER XV
On returning late in the evening Sonya went to Natasha's room, and
on the table, beside her lay Anatole's letter. Sonya picked it up
and read it.
As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha, trying to find in
her face an explanation of what she was reading, but did not find
herself from choking, Sonya, pale and trembling with fear and
"How was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can she
have left off loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin go
will Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is
the meaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the day before
yesterday, yesterday, and today," thought Sonya. "But it can't be that
she loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowing who it
thing!"
Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha, again scanning
her face.
"Ah, you're back?"
And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment
of awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sonya's look of
"Yes," answered Sonya softly.
Natasha smiled rapturously.
"No, Sonya, I can't any longer!" she said. "I can't hide it from you
any longer. You know, we love one another! Sonya, darling, he
writes... Sonya..."
Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha, unable to believe her ears.
"Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I am!" cried Natasha. "You
"But, Natasha, can that be all over?"
listen!" said Natasha, with momentary vexation.
"But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I don't understand. How
is it you have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly... Why, you
have only seen him three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you're
joking! In three days to forget everything and so..."
"Three days?" said Natasha. "It seems to me I've loved him a hundred
years. It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before. You can't
and kissed her.
"I had heard that it happens like this, and you must have heard it
before. As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his
do? What can I do, Sonya?" cried Natasha with a happy yet frightened
"But think what you are doing," cried Sonya. "I can't leave it
like this. This secret correspondence... How could you let him go so
far?" she went on, with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal.
"I told you that I have no will," Natasha replied. "Why can't you
"Then I won't let it come to that... I shall tell!" cried Sonya,
bursting into tears.
"What do you mean? For God's sake... If you tell, you are my enemy!"
When she saw Natasha's fright, Sonya shed tears of shame and pity
"But what has happened between you?" she asked. "What has he said to
you? Why doesn't he come to the house?"
"For God's sake, Sonya, don't tell anyone, don't torture me,"
Natasha entreated. "Remember no one ought to interfere in such
Sonya. "Why doesn't he openly ask for your hand? You know Prince
Andrew gave you complete freedom--if it is really so; but I don't
be?"
Natasha looked at Sonya with astonishment. Evidently this question
how to answer it.
"I don't know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!"
Sonya sighed and shook her head incredulously.
"If there were reasons..." she began.
"Sonya, one can't doubt him! One can't, one can't! Don't you
"But if he is dishonorable?"
"He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Natasha.
"If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions
him, and I will tell Papa!" said Sonya resolutely.
"But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha.
"Natasha, I don't understand you. And what are you saying! Think
of your father and of Nicholas."
"I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him. How dare you
say he is dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamed
for God's sake go! You see how I am suffering!" Natasha cried angrily,
in a voice of despair and repressed irritation. Sonya burst into
sobs and ran from the room.
that answer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all
the morning. In this letter she said briefly that all their
misunderstandings were at an end; that availing herself of the
magnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her her
freedom, she begged Princess Mary to forget everything and forgive her
On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the country, but on
estate near Moscow.
On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a big
dinner party at the Karagins', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there.
At that party Natasha again met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that she
spoke to him, trying not to be overheard, and that all through
dinner she was more agitated than ever. When they got home Natasha was
"There, Sonya, you were talking all sorts of nonsense about him,"
be praised. "We have had an explanation today."
"Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how glad I am you're
Natasha became thoughtful.
"Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said... He asked me what I
had promised Bolkonski. He was glad I was free to refuse him."
"I don't think anything, only I don't understand this..."
a man he is! Now don't think badly of me or of him. I don't think
badly of anyone: I love and pity everybody. But what am I to do?"
Sonya did not succumb to the tender tone Natasha used toward her.
The more emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's face
became, the more serious and stern grew Sonya's.
"Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to speak to you, and I
Natasha. Why this secrecy?"
"Natasha, I am afraid for you!"
"Afraid of what?"
"I am afraid you're going to your ruin," said Sonya resolutely,
and was herself horrified at what she had said.
your business! It won't be you, but I, who'll suffer. Leave me
alone, leave me alone! I hate you!"
The day before the count was to return, Sonya noticed that Natasha
sat by the drawingroom window all the morning as if expecting
whom Sonya took to be Anatole.
Sonya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticed
did not finish, and laughed at everything.
After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Natasha's door timidly
the door learned that another letter had been delivered.
"She will run away with him!" thought Sonya. "She is capable of
anything. There was something particularly pathetic and resolute in
her face today. She cried as she said good-by to Uncle," Sonya
remembered. "Yes, that's it, she means to elope with him, but what
am I to do?" thought she, recalling all the signs that clearly
indicated that Natasha had some terrible intention. "The count is
Andrew asked me to in case of some misfortune?... But perhaps she
really has already refused Bolkonski--she sent a letter to Princess
Mary yesterday. And Uncle is away...." To tell Marya Dmitrievna who
Nicholas. Yes! If I don't sleep for three nights I'll not leave this
passage and will hold her back by force and will and not let the
family be disgraced," thought she.
CHAPTER XVI
Anatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's. The plan for Natalie
at Natasha's door, resolved to safeguard her, it was to have been
put into execution. Natasha had promised to come out to Kuragin at the
marriage ceremony over them. At Kamenka a relay of horses was to
would hasten abroad with post horses.
Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousand
rubles he had taken from his sister and another ten thousand
borrowed with Dolokhov's help.
unbounded affection for Kuragin--were sitting at tea in Dolokhov's
front room.
cloak and high boots, at an open desk on which lay abacus and some
bundles of paper money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to
study to the room behind, where his French valet and others were
noting something down.
"Well," he said, "Khvostikov must have two thousand."
"Give it to him, then," said Anatole.
"Makarka" (their name for Makarin) "will go through fire and water
"Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listening to
leave his face.
"Fool," retorted Anatole. "Don't talk nonsense! If you only
knew... it's the devil knows what!"
"No, really, give it up!" said Dolokhov. "I am speaking seriously.
It's no joke, this plot you've hatched."
"What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?" said Anatole, making a
grimace. "Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he left
Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole
talking sense. Come here, come here!"
Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, trying to give him his
"Now listen to me. I'm telling you this for the last time. Why
should I joke about it? Did I hinder you? Who arranged everything
for you? Who found the priest and got the passport? Who raised the
money? I did it all."
"Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am not grateful?" And
"I helped you, but all the same I must tell you the truth; it is a
Well, you'll carry her off--all right! Will they let it stop at
that? It will come out that you're already married. Why, they'll
have you in the criminal court...."
"Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculated and again made a
reached by their own reasoning, repeated the argument he had already
put to Dolokhov a hundred times. "Didn't I explain to you that I
have come to this conclusion: if this marriage is invalid," he went
is valid, no matter! Abroad no one will know anything about it.
"Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutching his hair, left the
room, but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of
French. "What?"
Dolokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes
looked at him--evidently wishing to get some more amusement out of
thought of the future. "What then?... Then, I don't know.... But why
talk nonsense!" He glanced at his watch. "It's time!"
Anatole went into the back room.
"Now then! Nearly ready? You're dawdling!" he shouted to the
into the room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sitting.
smiling pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to
himself.
the other room.
"I don't want to," answered Anatole continuing to smile.
troyka driver who had known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years and
had given them good service with his troykas. More than once when
Anatole's regiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in
the evening, brought him to Moscow by daybreak, and driven him back
again the next night. More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape
when pursued. More than once he had driven them through the town
with gypsies and "ladykins" as he called the cocottes. More than
once in their service he had run over pedestrians and upset vehicles
in the streets of Moscow and had always been protected from the
consequences by "my gentlemen" as he called them. He had ruined more
than one horse in their service. More than once they had beaten him,
and more than once they had made him drunk on champagne and Madeira,
which he loved; and he knew more than one thing about each of them
which would long ago have sent an ordinary man to Siberia. They
at the gypsies', and more than one thousand rubles of their money
liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour, liked upsetting a
driver or running down a pedestrian, and flying at full gallop through
him: "Get on! Get on!" when it was impossible to go any faster. He
liked giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant who, more dead
than alive, was already hurrying out of his way. "Real gentlemen!"
he considered them.
Anatole and Dolokhov liked Balaga too for his masterly driving and
with "his gentlemen" he always drove himself and never demanded
from their valets that they had money in hand--he would turn up of a
morning quite sober and with a deep bow would ask them to help him.
The gentlemen always made him sit down.
"Do help me out, Theodore Ivanych, sir," or "your excellency," he
to the fair."
And Anatole and Dolokhov, when they had money, would give him a
thousand or a couple of thousand rubles.
Balaga was a fair-haired, short, and snub-nosed peasant of about
On entering the room now he crossed himself, turning toward the
front corner of the room, and went up to Dolokhov, holding out a
small, black hand.
"Theodore Ivanych!" he said, bowing.
to Anatole who had just come in.
"I say, Balaga," said Anatole, putting his hands on the man's
shoulders, "do you care for me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service....
What horses have you come with? Eh?"
in three hours. Eh?"
"When they are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaga with a wink.
"Why joke?" said the driver, laughing. "As if I'd grudge my
we'll go!"
"Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit down."
"I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych."
a red silk handkerchief he took out of his cap.
"That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn't we be
there in time?" replied Balaga. "Didn't we get you to Tver in seven
hours? I think you remember that, your excellency?"
smilingly at the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazed
it took one's breath away, the rate we flew. We came across a train of
loaded sleighs and drove right over two of them. Eh?"
harnessed two young side horses with the bay in the shafts," he went
yourself, your excellency!' says I, and I just tumbled on the bottom
of the sleigh and sprawled there. It wasn't a case of urging them
took us there in three hours! Only the near one died of it."
Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later
looked in a mirror, and standing before Dolokhov in the same pose he
had assumed before it, he lifted a glass of wine.
"Well, good-by, Theodore. Thank you for everything and farewell!"
said Anatole. "Well, comrades and friends..." he considered for a
moment "...of my youth, farewell!" he said, turning to Makarin and the
others.
make something touching and solemn out of this address to his
his glass flung it on the floor.
"To your health!" said Balaga who also emptied his glass, and
Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes.
"Let's go. Let's go!" cried Anatole.
Balaga was about to leave the room.
"No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door; we have first to sit down.
That's the way."
They shut the door and all sat down.
went out into the vestibule.
"And where's the fur cloak?" asked Dolokhov. "Hey, Ignatka! Go to
Matrena Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard what
rush out more dead than alive just in the things she is wearing; if
you delay at all there'll be tears and 'Papa' and 'Mamma,' and she's
frozen in a minute and must go back--but you wrap the fur cloak
"Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, the sable!" he
shouted so that his voice rang far through the rooms.
eyes and curly blue-black hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with a
sable mantle on her arm.
"Here, I don't grudge it--take it!" she said, evidently afraid of
her master and yet regretful of her cloak.
Dolokhov, without answering, took the cloak, threw it over
Matrena, and wrapped her up in it.
"That's the way," said Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned the
collar up round her head, leaving only a little of the face uncovered.
"And then so, do you see?" and he pushed Anatole's head forward to
revels here are over. Remember me to Steshka. There, good-by! Good-by,
Matrena, wish me luck!"
gypsy accent.
Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers
Dolokhov got in with him. Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated
"Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troyka
tore down the Nikitski Boulevard.
"Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi!... Tproo!..." The shouting of Balaga
and of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could be
heard. On the Arbat Square the troyka caught against a carriage;
something cracked, shouts were heard, and the troyka flew along the
Arbat Street.
After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaga began to
Konyusheny Street.
The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and
gate Dolokhov whistled. The whistle was answered, and a maidservant
"Come into the courtyard or you'll be seen; she'll come out
directly," said she.
Dolokhov stayed by the gate. Anatole followed the maid into the
courtyard, turned the corner, and ran up into the porch.
He was met by Gabriel, Marya Dmitrievna's gigantic footman.
"Come to the mistress, please," said the footman in his deep bass,
whisper.
"Kuragin! Come back!" shouted Dolokhov. "Betrayed! Back!"
was struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. With
Anatole ran back seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket,
Marya Dmitrievna, having found Sonya weeping in the corridor, made
her confess everything, and intercepting the note to Natasha she
"You shameless good-for-nothing!" said she. "I won't hear a word."
Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but
tearless eyes, she locked her in; and having given orders to the
not to let them out again, and having told the footman to bring them
abductors.
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run
through the rooms a long time considering what she should do. Toward
midnight she went to Natasha's room fingering the key in her pocket.
"Disgusting, abominable... In my house... horrid girl, hussy! I'm only
sorry for her father!" thought she, trying to restrain her wrath.
"Hard as it may be, I'll tell them all to hold their tongues and
will hide it from the count." She entered the room with resolute
steps. Natasha lying on the sofa, her head hidden in her hands, and
Dmitrievna had left her.
"A nice girl! Very nice!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "Arranging meetings
speak to you!" And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm. "Listen when when
Natasha did not change her position, but her whole body heaved
wrenching herself from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious
still, stay like that then, I won't touch you. But listen. I won't
tell you how guilty you are. You know that yourself. But when your
Again Natasha's body shook with sobs.
"I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" cried Natasha.
challenges him to a duel will that be all right? Eh?"
"Oh, let me be! Why have you interfered at all? Why? Why? Who
asked you to?" shouted Natasha, raising herself on the sofa and
looking malignantly at Marya Dmitrievna.
again. "Were you kept under lock and key? Who hindered his coming to
the house? Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing
girl?... Well, if he had carried you off... do you think they wouldn't
have found him? Your father, or brother, or your betrothed? And he's a
"He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha getting up. "If
you hadn't interfered... Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it?
Marya Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out:
Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining on
nobody would know anything about it if only Natasha herself would
happened. Natasha did not reply, nor did she sob any longer, but she
her head, covered her with two quilts, and herself brought her some
lime-flower water, but Natasha did not respond to her.
Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time
for lunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits; the
nothing to keep him any longer in Moscow, away from the countess
morning. With compressed and parched lips and dry fixed eyes, she
evidently expecting news of him and that he would come or would
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the
is the matter with you, my angel? Are you ill?" asked the count.
After a moment's silence Natasha answered: "Yes, ill."
dejected and whether anything had happened to her betrothed, she
assured him that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry.
Marya Dmitrievna confirmed Natasha's assurances that nothing had
happened. From the pretense of illness, from his daughter's
distress, and by the embarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya
Dmitrievna, the count saw clearly that something had gone wrong during
own cheerful tranquillity, that he avoided inquiries and tried to
assure himself that nothing particularly had happened; and he was only
country.
When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya
Dmitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of great
for her was stronger than a married man's should be for his friend's
fiancee. Yet some fate constantly threw them together.
"What can have happened? And what can they want with me?" thought he
would hurry up and come and marry her!" thought he on his way to the
"Pierre! Been back long?" someone shouted. Pierre raised his head.
In a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering
dashed past. Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of
hair besprinkled with powdery snow.
he is always cheerful, satisfied, and serene. What wouldn't I give
to be like him!" he thought enviously.
his fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.
window, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round at
"What has happened?" asked Pierre, entering Marya Dmitrievna's room.
"Fine doings!" answered Dmitrievna. "For fifty-eight years have I
lived in this world and never known anything so disgraceful!"
without her parents' knowledge and that the cause of this was
with whom Natasha had tried to elope during her father's absence, in
Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was
told him, scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Prince
Andrew's deeply loved affianced wife--the same Natasha Rostova who
who was already secretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in
love with him as to agree to run away with him, was something Pierre
baseness, folly, and cruelty. He thought of his wife. "They are all
unfortunate enough to be tied to a bad woman. But still he pitied
Prince Andrew to the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded
pride, and the more he pitied his friend the more did he think with
contempt and even with disgust of that Natasha who had just passed him
expression of calm dignity and severity.
"But how get married?" said Pierre, in answer to Marya Dmitrievna.
"Things get worse from hour to hour!" ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna.
expecting him."
After hearing the details of Anatole's marriage from Pierre, and
giving vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Marya
Dmitrievna told Pierre why she had sent for him. She was afraid that
of this affair (which she hoped to hide from them) might challenge
Anatole to a duel, and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his
brother-in-law in her name to leave Moscow and not dare to let her set
count, Nicholas, and Prince Andrew--promised to do as she wished.
to the drawing room.
"Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as if you know nothing
expecting him! And stay to dinner if you care to!" she called after
Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski.
"Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he said to Pierre. "What
troubles one has with these girls without their mother! I do so regret
has broken off her engagement without consulting anybody? It's true
this engagement never was much to my liking. Of course he is an
excellent man, but still, with his father's disapproval they
wouldn't have been happy, and Natasha won't lack suitors. Still, it
Count, hard to manage daughters in their mother's absence...."
subject, but the count returned to his troubles.
"Natasha is not quite well; she's in her room and would like to
see you. Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come."
"Yes, you are a great friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants to
send him a message," said the count. "Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy it
And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the
When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married, Natasha
did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by
Pierre himself. Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along the
corridor to Natasha's room.
the moment he entered. She did not smile or nod, but only gazed
fixedly at him, and her look asked only one thing: was he a friend, or
like the others an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he
evidently did not exist for her.
"He knows all about it," said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre
and addressing Natasha. "Let him tell you whether I have told the
truth."
animal looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen.
feeling of pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do,
"whether it is true or not should make no difference to you,
because..."
"Then it is not true that he's married!"
"Yes, it is true."
"Has he been married long?" she asked. "On your honor?..."
Pierre gave his word of honor.
"Is he still here?" she asked, quickly.
"Yes, I have just seen him."
She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands
that they should leave her alone.
CHAPTER XX
once. He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin, at the
was going on as usual. The members who were assembling for dinner were
sitting about in groups; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town
news. The footman having greeted him, knowing his habits and his
acquaintances, while they were talking about the weather, asked if
he had heard of Kuragin's abduction of Rostova which was talked of
nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs'. He asked everyone
that he was coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to see this calm,
indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in his
soul. He paced through the ballroom, waited till everyone had come,
and as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove
home.
Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with
Dolokhov, consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate
affair. It seemed to him essential to see Natasha. In the evening he
drove to his sister's to discuss with her how to arrange a meeting.
When Pierre returned home after vainly hunting all over Moscow, his
countess' drawing room was full of guests.
return--at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever-
"Ah, Pierre," said the countess going up to her husband. "You
She stopped, seeing in the forward thrust of her husband's head,
in his glowing eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications of
that rage and strength which she knew and had herself experienced
after his duel with Dolokhov.
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready
to follow Pierre. Pierre, taking him by the arm, pulled him toward
himself and was leading him from the room.
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face
Anatole without looking at him.
"Mon cher," answered Anatole (their whole conversation was in
French), "I don't consider myself bound to answer questions put to
me in that tone."
Anatole by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook him
terror.
"When I tell you that I must talk to you!..." repeated Pierre.
"Come now, this is stupid. What?" said Anatole, fingering a button
of his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth.
"You're a scoundrel and a blackguard, and I don't know what deprives
me from the pleasure of smashing your head with this!" said Pierre,
expressing himself so artificially because he was talking French.
"Did you promise to marry her?"
"I... I didn't think of it. I never promised, because..."
"Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?" he said, moving
toward Anatole.
Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his
pocket and drew out his pocketbook.
Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a table
"I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre in answer to a
if repeating a lesson to himself. "Secondly," he continued after a
short pause, again rising and again pacing the room, "tomorrow you
"But how can I?..."
"Thirdly," Pierre continued without listening to him, "you must
Rostova. I know I can't prevent your doing so, but if you have a spark
of conscience..." Pierre paced the room several times in silence.
"After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure there
is such a thing as other people's happiness and peace, and that you
are ruining a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself! Amuse
you by the same experience of debauchery; but to promise a maid to
marry her... to deceive, to kidnap.... Don't you understand that it is
as mean as beating an old man or a child?..."
a questioning look.
confident as Pierre mastered his wrath. "I don't know that and don't
want to," he said, not looking at Pierre and with a slight tremor of
his lower jaw, "but you have used such words to me--'mean' and so
on--which as a man of honor I can't allow anyone to use."
wanted.
"Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically.
"I take them back, I take them back!" said Pierre, "and I ask you to
forgive me." Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button. "And if
you require money for your journey..."
"Oh, vile and heartless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.
Next day Anatole left for Petersburg.
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her of the fulfillment of
her wish that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow. The whole
house was in a state of alarm and commotion. Natasha was very ill,
night after she had been told that Anatole was married, with some
arsenic she had stealthily procured. After swallowing a little she had
been so frightened that she woke Sonya and told her what she had done.
The necessary antidotes had been administered in time and she was
now out of danger, though still so weak that it was out of the
question to move her to the country, and so the countess had been sent
for. Pierre saw the distracted count, and Sonya, who had a
tear-stained face, but he could not see Natasha.
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip
rumors, assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that his
Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and
Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town from
Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which
than usual and awaited his son with great impatience.
Some days after Anatole's departure Pierre received a note from
Prince Andrew, informing him of his arrival and asking him to come
to see him.
As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his
(Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and
given it to the old prince), and he heard from him the story of
Natasha's elopement, with additions.
Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see
the drawing room to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated
voice about some intrigue going on in Petersburg. The old prince's
to meet Pierre. She sighed, looking toward the door of the room
with his sorrow, but Pierre saw by her face that she was glad both
at what had happened and at the way her brother had taken the news
"He says he expected it," she remarked. "I know his pride will not
let him express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far
better, than I expected. Evidently it had to be...."
"But is it possible that all is really ended?" asked Pierre.
Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did not
understand how he could ask such a question. Pierre went into the
study. Prince Andrew, greatly changed and plainly in better health,
but with a fresh horizontal wrinkle between his brows, stood in
civilian dress facing his father and Prince Meshcherski, warmly
disputing and vigorously gesticulating. The conversation was about
Speranski--the news of whose sudden exile and alleged treachery had
to throw on him all the blame of other men's mistakes is very easy,
but I maintain that if anything good has been accomplished in this
reign it was done by him, by him alone."
He paused at the sight of Pierre. His face quivered and
immediately assumed a vindictive expression.
"Well, how are you? Still getting stouter?" he said with
animation, but the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I am
well," he said in answer to Pierre's question, and smiled.
To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, but my health is
frontier, about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre,
and about M. Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be his
son's tutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation
they would have been made public," he said with warmth and haste. "I
Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only
too familiar, to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous
matters in order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too
intimate. When Prince Meshcherski had left, Prince Andrew took
Pierre's arm and asked him into the room that had been assigned him. A
from which he drew a packet wrapped in paper. He did it all silently
and very quickly. He stood up and coughed. His face was gloomy and his
"Forgive me for troubling you..."
Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha, and his
Prince Andrew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he
"I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard
reports of your brother-in-law having sought her hand, or something of
that kind. Is that true?"
"Both true and untrue," Pierre began; but Prince Andrew
interrupted him.
He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre.
"She is very ill," said Pierre.
"Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. "And Prince
"He left long ago. She has been at death's door."
"I much regret her illness," said Prince Andrew; and he smiled
like his father, coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly.
hand?" said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.
Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his
"And where is your brother-in-law now, if I may ask?" he said.
"Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew. "Tell Countess
Rostova that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all
that is good."
would say anything, looked fixedly at him.
"about..."
hand again, be magnanimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be very
wish to be my friend never speak to me of that... of all that! Well,
good-by. So you'll give her the packet?"
The old man seemed livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the same
her satisfaction that the engagement had been broken off. Looking at
them Pierre realized what contempt and animosity they all felt for the
else.
At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which was
becoming evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with
CHAPTER XXII
That same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfill the
Dmitrievna who was interested to know how Prince Andrew had taken
the news. Ten minutes later Sonya came to Marya Dmitrievna.
"Natasha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirilovich," said she.
"But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has not
been tidied up."
"When will her mother come? She has worried me to death! Now mind,
heart to scold her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be
to find her. When he appeared at the door she grew flurried, evidently
usual; but she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, her
went to the middle of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a different
"Peter Kirilovich," she began rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was your
friend--is your friend," she corrected herself. (It seemed to her that
to apply to you..."
Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till then
he had reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he
now felt so sorry for her that there was no room in his soul for
"Yes... I will tell him," answered Pierre; "but..."
be. I'm only tormented by the wrong I have done him. Tell him only
that I beg him to forgive, forgive, forgive me for everything...."
She trembled all over and sat down on a chair.
A sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre's heart.
"I should like to know, did you love..." Pierre did not know how
to refer to Anatole and flushed at the thought of him--"did you love
that bad man?"
"Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "But I don't know, don't know at
all...."
She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity, tenderness,
spectacles and hoped they would not be noticed.
"We won't speak of it any more, my dear," said Pierre, and his
gentle, cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natasha.
"We won't speak of it, my dear--I'll tell him everything; but one
thing I beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help,
advice, or simply to open your heart to someone--not now, but when
Pierre grew confused.
"Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth it!" exclaimed
Natasha and turned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.
he was amazed at his own words.
"Before me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame and
moment ask on my knees for your hand and your love!"
Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom,
restraining tears of tenderness and joy that choked him, and without
finding the sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his
sleigh.
"Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where can I go now? Surely not to
comparison with this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced: in
comparison with that softened, grateful, last look she had given him
through her tears.
Fahrenheit he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and
black roofs, stretched the dark starry sky. Only looking up at the sky
things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been
starry sky presented itself to his eyes. Almost in the center of it,
above the Prechistenka Boulevard, surrounded and sprinkled on all
enormous and brilliant comet of 1812--the comet which was said to
however, that comet with its long luminous tail aroused no feeling
of fear. On the contrary he gazed joyfully, his eyes moist with tears,
like an arrow piercing the earth--to remain fixed in a chosen spot,
vigorously holding its tail erect, shining and displaying its white
light amid countless other scintillating stars. It seemed to Pierre
that this comet fully responded to what was passing in his own
CHAPTER I
From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating
of the forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these forces-
millions of men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the army-
against one another such innumerable crimes, frauds, treacheries,
thefts, forgeries, issues of false money, burglaries, incendiarisms,
and murders as in whole centuries are not recorded in the annals of
all the law courts of the world, but which those who committed them
did not at the time regard as being crimes.
What produced this extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes?
The historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the
Alexander, the mistakes of the diplomatists, and so on.
Rumyantsev, or Talleyrand, between a levee and an evening party, to
Napoleon to have written to Alexander: "My respected Brother, I
would have been no war.
contemporaries. It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was
caused by England's intrigues (as in fact he said on the island of St.
the cause of the war was Napoleon's ambition; to the Duke of
Oldenburg, that the cause of the war was the violence done to him;
to businessmen that the cause of the way was the Continental System
which was ruining Europe; to the generals and old soldiers that the
chief reason for the war was the necessity of giving them
re-establishing les bons principes, and to the diplomatists of that
time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance between
Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealed
from Napoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178.
It is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of
posterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude and
perceive its plain and terrible meaning, these causes seem
insufficient. To us it is incomprehensible that millions of
Christian men killed and tortured each other either because Napoleon
was ambitious or Alexander was firm, or because England's policy was
astute or the Duke of Oldenburg wronged. We cannot grasp what
To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carried
the more of them we find; and each separate cause or whole series of
causes appears to us equally valid in itself and equally false by
that French corporal to serve a second term appears as much a cause as
restore the duchy of Oldenburg; for had he not wished to serve, and
refused, there would have been so many less men in Napoleon's army and
the war could not have occurred.
Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw
beyond the Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, there would
second term then also there could have been no war. Nor could there
Oldenburg, and had Alexander not felt insulted, and had there not been
subsequent dictatorship and Empire, or all the things that produced
the French Revolution, and so on. Without each of these causes nothing
could have happened. So all these causes--myriads of causes--coincided
to bring it about. And so there was no one cause for that
occurrence, but it had to occur because it had to. Millions of men,
renouncing their human feelings and reason, had to go from west to
east to slay their fellows, just as some centuries previously hordes
of men had come from the east to the west, slaying their fellows.
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event
who was drawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription. This
could not be otherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon and
Alexander (on whom the event seemed to depend) should be carried
any one of which the event could not have taken place. It was
the soldiers who fired, or transported provisions and guns--should
consent to carry out the will of these weak individuals, and should
have been induced to do so by an infinite number of diverse and
complex causes.
We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of
irrational events (that is to say, events the reasonableness of
history reasonably, the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they
Each man lives for himself, using his freedom to attain his personal
from doing this or that action; but as soon as he has done it, that
belongs to history, in which it has not a free but a predestined
significance.
There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life,
which is the more free the more abstract its interests, and his
elemental hive life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for
him.
Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconscious
humanity. A deed done is irrevocable, and its result coinciding in
time with the actions of millions of other men assumes an historic
significance. The higher a man stands on the social ladder, the more
people he is connected with and the more power he has over others, the
action.
uses every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.
Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than
ever that it depended on him, verser (ou ne pas verser) le sang de ses
he had never been so much in the grip of inevitable laws, which
compelled him, while thinking that he was acting on his own
volition, to perform for the hive life--that is to say, for history-
*"To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples."
The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and
by the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and
nonobservance of the Continental System, the Duke of Oldenburg's
seemed to Napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace,
the French Emperor's love and habit of war coinciding with his
people's inclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the preparations,
and the expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtaining
advantages to compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicating honors
opinion of contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to
the event that was happening or coincided with it.
When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because of
its attraction to the earth, because its stalk withers, because it
is dried by the sun, because it grows heavier, because the wind shakes
it, or because the boy standing below wants to eat it?
Nothing is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of conditions
in which all vital organic and elemental events occur. And the
decays and so forth is equally right with the child who stands under
desired his destruction, and he who says that an undermined hill
weighing a million tons fell because the last navvy struck it for
the smallest connection with the event itself.
Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will,
is in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole
course of history and predestined from eternity.
CHAPTER II
On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent
and princes with whom he was dissatisfied, presented pearls and
diamonds of his own--that is, which he had taken from other kings-
to the Empress of Austria, and having, as his historian tells us,
the parting which she seemed hardly able to bear. Though the
worked zealously to that end, and though the Emperor Napoleon
and sincerely assured him that he did not want war and would always
surrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort, along the road to
The army was moving from west to east, and relays of six horses
with the army, he spent the night in apartments prepared for him on
*Old style.
Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and the
wide-spreading steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city of
unexpectedly, and contrary alike to strategic and diplomatic
considerations, ordered an advance, and the next day his army began to
cross the Niemen.
Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent,
looked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out
were on the lookout for him, and when they caught sight of a figure in
an overcoat and a cocked hat standing apart from his suite in front of
the vast forest that had concealed them and, separating, flowed on and
on by the three bridges to the other side.
"Now we'll go into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand himself,
things get hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l'Empereur! So
revoir, Beauche; I'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au
Minister of Kashmir--that's settled. Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah!
hurrah! hurrah! The Cossacks--those rascals--see how they run! Vive
young, of most diverse characters and social positions. On the faces
of all was one common expression of joy at the commencement of the
long-expected campaign and of rapture and devotion to the man in the
gray coat who was standing on the hill.
On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Arab horse
was brought to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to one
of the bridges over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessant
everywhere disturbed him and distracted him from the military cares
one of the swaying pontoon bridges to the farther side, turned sharply
delight, galloped ahead to clear a path for him through the troops. On
pressing against one another to see him.
Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a
up to him, and he gazed at the opposite bank. Then he became
absorbed in a map laid out on the logs. Without lifting his head he
said something, and two of his aides-de-camp galloped off to the
Polish Uhlans.
"What? What did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlans
The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonel
speech from excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be
permitted to swim the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a ford.
In evident fear of refusal, like a boy asking for permission to get on
Emperor's eyes. The aide-de-camp replied that probably the Emperor
would not be displeased at this excess of zeal.
officer, with happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted
and galloped into the river. He gave an angry thrust to his horse,
for the deepest part where the current was swift. Hundreds of Uhlans
galloped in after him. It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in
the middle of the stream, and the Uhlans caught hold of one another as
of the men; the others tried to swim on, some in the saddle and some
clinging to their horses' manes. They tried to make their way
forward to the opposite bank and, though there was a ford one third of
a mile away, were proud that they were swimming and drowning in this
river under the eyes of the man who sat on the log and was not even
Emperor's attention to the devotion of the Poles to his person, the
little man in the gray overcoat got up and, having summoned
Berthier, began pacing up and down the bank with him, giving him
instructions and occasionally glancing disapprovingly at the
drowning Uhlans who distracted his attention.
the world, from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike, was enough
for his horse and rode to his quarters.
Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats were
which they had started. The colonel and some of his men got across and
with difficulty clambered out on the further bank. And as soon as they
but where he no longer was and at that moment considered themselves
happy.
paper money prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as
quickly as possible and another that a Saxon should be shot, on whom a
letter containing information about the orders to the French army
had been found, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish
colonel who had needlessly plunged into the river should be enrolled
Quos vult perdere dementat.*
CHAPTER III
a month, reviewing troops and holding maneuvers. Nothing was ready for
the war that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor
had come from Petersburg. There was no general plan of action. The
of the three armies had its own commander in chief, but there was no
that responsibility himself.
The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody-
surrounded the sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend
the courtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the
given for the Emperor by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eagerly
received. The Emperor gave his consent. The aides-de-camp collected
money by subscription. The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to
the Emperor was invited to act as hostess. Count Bennigsen, being a
landowner in the Vilna province, offered his country house for the
fete, and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner,
regatta, and fireworks at Zakret, Count Bennigsen's country seat.
frontier, Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by
his aides-de-camp at Bennigsen's country house.
It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such matters
declared that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one
place. Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who
refined Polish ladies by her massive, so called Russian type of
present en garcon (as he phrased it), was also there and, though not
an aide-de-camp, had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses. Boris
was now a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer sought
his own age. He was meeting Helene in Vilna after not having seen
her for a long time and did not recall the past, but as Helene was
enjoying the favors of a very important personage and Boris had only
recently married, they met as good friends of long standing.
At midnight dancing was still going on. Helene, not having a
suitable partner, herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris.
bare shoulders which emerged from a dark, gold-embroidered, gauze
of it himself and unnoticed by others, never for an instant ceased
to observe the Emperor who was in the same room. The Emperor was not
another with gracious words which he alone knew how to utter.
and contrary to court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to
inquiringly at Balashev and, evidently understanding that he only
slightly to the lady and turned to him. Hardly had Balashev begun to
speak before a look of amazement appeared on the Emperor's face. He
sides made way for him. Boris noticed Arakcheev's excited face when
the sovereign went out with Balashev. Arakcheev looked at the
Emperor from under his brow and, sniffing with his red nose, stepped
forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor to address him.
But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated
garden without noticing Arakcheev who, holding his sword and
glancing wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.
he was worried by the question of what news Balashev had brought and
how he could find it out before others. In the figure in which he
had to choose two ladies, he whispered to Helene that he meant to
veranda, he stood still. They were moving toward the door. Boris,
close to the doorpost with bowed head.
The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personally
long as a single armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed to
Boris that it gave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words. He was
displeased that Boris had overheard it.
"Let no one know of it!" the Emperor added with a frown.
Boris understood that this was meant for him and, closing his
eyes, slightly bowed his head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom and
remained there about another half-hour.
Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French army
The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen was
particularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations,
and at a ball. On first receiving the news, under the influence of
him, fully expressed his feelings, and has since become famous. On
returning home at two o'clock that night he sent for his secretary,
rescript to Field Marshal Prince Saltykov, in which he insisted on the
single armed Frenchman remained on Russian soil.
Monsieur mon frere,
Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty which I have kept my
engagements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian
frontier, and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note, in
that Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with
on which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him
declared, was never authorized to make that demand, and as soon as I
was informed of it I let him know how much I disapproved of it and
to shed the blood of our peoples for such a misunderstanding, and
consents to withdraw your troops from Russian territory, I will regard
what has passed as not having occurred and an understanding between us
will be possible. In the contrary case, Your Majesty, I shall see
It still depends on Your Majesty to preserve humanity from the
calamity of another war. I am, etc.,
CHAPTER IV
At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, having
sent for Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him
to take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor. When
dispatching Balashev, the Emperor repeated to him the words that he
Russian soil and told him to transmit those words to Napoleon.
them at a moment when a last attempt at reconciliation was being made,
but he definitely instructed Balashev to repeat them personally to
Napoleon.
Having set off in the small hours of the fourteenth, accompanied
by a bugler and two Cossacks, Balashev reached the French outposts
at the village of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn.
A French noncommissioned officer of hussars, in crimson uniform
and a shaggy cap, shouted to the approaching Balashev to halt.
Balashev did not do so at once, but continued to advance along the
road at a walking pace.
advanced his horse's chest against Balashev, put his hand to his
saber, and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking: was he
deaf that he did not do as he was told? Balashev mentioned who he was.
The noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about
regimental matters without looking at the Russian general.
After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, after
service, Balashev found it very strange here on Russian soil to
encounter this hostile, and still more this disrespectful, application
of brute force to himself.
The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the air
was fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven along the road
from the village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, one
after another, like bubbles rising in water.
Balashev looked around him, awaiting the arrival of an officer
hussars looked silently at one another from time to time.
accompanied by two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and their
horses all looked smart and well kept.
trim, almost like that of peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade of
of enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campaign.
The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was
his soldiers and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to
be presented to the Emperor would most likely be satisfied
immediately, as the Emperor's quarters were, he believed, not far off.
They rode through the village of Rykonty, past tethered French
hussar horses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and
division was a mile and a quarter away and would receive Balashev
and conduct him to his destination.
They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw a
group of horsemen coming toward them. In front of the group, on a
black horse with trappings that glittered in the sun, rode a tall
man with plumes in his hat and black hair curling down to his
shoulders. He wore a red mantle, and stretched his long legs forward
in French fashion. This man rode toward Balashev at a gallop, his
Balashev was only two horses' length from the equestrian with the
bracelets, plunies, necklaces, and gold embroidery, who was
galloping toward him with a theatrically solemn countenance, when
Julner, the French colonel, whispered respectfully: "The King of
Naples!" It was, in fact, Murat, now called "King of Naples." Though
it was quite incomprehensible why he should be King of Naples, he
was called so, and was himself convinced that he was so, and therefore
sure that he really was the King of Naples that when, on the eve of
his departure from that city, while walking through the streets with
his wife, some Italians called out to him: "Viva il re!"* he turned to
that I am leaving them tomorrow!"
*"Long live the king."
after he had been ordered to return to military service--and
especially since his last interview with Napoleon in Danzig, when
his august brother-in-law had told him: "I made you King that you
feels himself in harness and grows skittish between the shafts--he
On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head, with its
long hair curling to his shoulders, in a majestically royal manner,
and looked inquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel respectfully
pronounce.
difficulty that had presented itself to the colonel). "Charmed to make
your acquaintance, General!" he added, with a gesture of kingly
condescension.
withers of Balashev's horse and said:
"Well, General, it all looks like war," as if regretting a
circumstance of which he was unable to judge.
words Your Majesty at every opportunity, with the affectation
unavoidable in frequently addressing one to whom the title was still a
novelty.
Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to
"Monsieur de Bal-macheve." But royaute oblige!* and he felt it
with Alexander's envoy. He dismounted, took Balashev's arm, and moving
a few steps away from his suite, which waited respectfully, began to
referred to the fact that the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand
that demand became generally known and the dignity of France was
because..." but Murat interrupted him.
"Then you don't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?" he
asked unexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.
Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of
the war.
"Oh, my dear general!" Murat again interrupted him, "with all my
heart I wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, and
possible!" said he, in the tone of a servant who wants to remain
good friends with another despite a quarrel between their masters.
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of
his health, and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had
spent with him in Naples. Then suddenly, as if remembering his royal
mission," and with his embroidered red mantle, his flowing feathers,
and his glittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite who were
respectfully awaiting him.
Balashev rode on, supposing from Murat's words that he would very
soon be brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the
next village the sentinels of Davout's infantry corps detained him
as the pickets of the vanguard had done, and an adjutant of the
Marshal Davout.
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander--though not a
coward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable to
express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.
necessary in the organism of nature, and they always exist, always
inevitability alone can explain how the cruel Arakcheev, who tore
out a grenadier's mustache with his own hands, whose weak nerves
man nor a courtier, was able to maintain his powerful position with
Alexander, whose own character was chivalrous, noble, and gentle.
hard at work and in a hurry. "How can I think of the bright side of
life when, as you see, I am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty
shed?" the expression of his face seemed to say. The chief pleasure
and necessity of such men, when they encounter anyone who shows
animation, is to flaunt their own dreary, persistent activity.
Davout allowed himself that pleasure when Balashev was brought in.
Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only because
Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened to
Davout, after hearing him, became still surlier and ruder.
"Where is your dispatch?" he inquired. "Give it to me. I will send
it to the Emperor."
"Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your army, but here," said
And, as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his
dependence on brute force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer
on it, laid across two barrels). Davout took the packet and read the
"You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,"
protested Balashev, "but permit me to observe that I have the honor to
be adjutant general to His Majesty...."
Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the
in his pocket, left the shed.
A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de Castres, came in and
conducted Balashev to the quarters assigned him.
barrels.
him, peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with the
except Monsieur de Castres.
the sphere of power in which he had so lately moved--and after several
the whole district, Balashev was brought to Vilna--now occupied by the
French--through the very gate by which he had left it four days
Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting, the Comte de Turenne,
Four days before, sentinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment had
stood in front of the house to which Balashev was conducted, and now
two French grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front
and with shaggy caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars and
round his saddle horse and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received
Balashev in the very house in Vilna from which Alexander had
dispatched him on his mission.
Though Balashev was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the
luxury and magnificence of Napoleon's court.
generals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates--several of whom
going for his ride.
After some minutes, the gentleman-in-waiting who was on duty came
into the great reception room and, bowing politely, asked Balashev
to follow him.
Balashev went into a small reception room, one door of which led
into a study, the very one from which the Russian Emperor had
dispatched him on his mission. He stood a minute or two, waiting. He
heard hurried footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened
rapidly; all was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of
rotund stomach, white leather breeches tightly fitting the fat
gracious and majestic expression of imperial welcome.
He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his head
thick shoulders, and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding, had
that imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live
that day.
up to him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of
"Good day, General!" said he. "I have received the letter you
glanced with his large eyes into Balashav's face and immediately
looked past him.
It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him at
everything in the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on his
will.
"I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued, "but it has
receive any explanations you can give me."
And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons for
moderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke, Balashev
into negotiations.
eyes bent on him confused him. "You are flurried--compose yourself!"
Balashev recovered himself and began to speak. He said that the
passports a sufficient cause for war; that Kurakin had acted on his
Alexander did not desire war, and had no relations with England.
"Not yet!" interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearing to give vent to
his feelings, he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashev
might proceed.
After saying all he had been instructed to say, Balashev added
that the Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enter
he remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in his
letter, but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykov and had
told Balashev to repeat to Napoleon. Balashev remembered these
words, "So long as a single armed foe remains on Russian soil," but
some complex feeling restrained him. He could not utter them, though
he wished to do so. He grew confused and said: "On condition that
Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarrassment when uttering these last
words; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to
quiver rhythmically. Without moving from where he stood he began
speaking in a louder tone and more hurriedly than before. During the
speech that followed, Balashev, who more than once lowered his eyes,
increased the more Napoleon raised his voice.
"Have I not for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it?
I have waited eighteen months for explanations. But in order to
begin negotiations, what is demanded of me?" he said, frowning and
making an energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump
hand.
"The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire," replied
Balashev.
straight at Balashev.
Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from
Pomerania, only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded.
"You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen
ago the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the
He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and
was quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in
its stern expression. This quivering of his left leg was a thing
"Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be
made to a Prince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost screamed,
quite to his own surprise. "If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I
could not accept such conditions. You say I have begun this war! But
offer me negotiations! But what is the aim of your alliance with
England? What has she given you?" he continued hurriedly, evidently no
longer trying to show the advantages of peace and discuss its
words.
The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt
commencement of the interview.
"I hear you have made peace with Turkey?"
Balashev bowed his head affirmatively.
"Peace has been concluded..." he began.
But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do all
the talking himself, and continued to talk with the sort of
eloquence and unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so
prone.
Moldavia and Wallachia; I would have given your sovereign those
provinces as I gave him Finland. Yes," he went on, "I promised and
would have given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia, and now
almost the very words he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit. "All
"What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander's might have been!"
tried to make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him.
"What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained
through my friendship?" demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders
in perplexity. "But no, he has preferred to surround himself with my
enemies, and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, and
subject; Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier than the others, but
all the same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807
and who should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander's
mind.... Granted that were they competent they might be made use
of," continued Napoleon--hardly able to keep pace in words with the
rush of thoughts that incessantly sprang up, proving how right and
"but they are not even that! They are neither fit for war nor peace!
Barclay is said to be the most capable of them all, but I cannot say
so, judging by his first movements. And what are they doing, all these
stupid, but he has experience, a quick eye, and resolution.... And
happens. A sovereign should not be with the army unless he is a
general!" said Napoleon, evidently uttering these words as a direct
challenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alexander desired to be a
able to defend Vilna. You are cut in two and have been driven out of
the Polish provinces. Your army is grumbling."
fireworks with difficulty, "the troops are burning with eagerness..."
"I know everything!" Napoleon interrupted him. "I know everything. I
know the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. You
have not two hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number.
I have five hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the
and have shown it by making peace with you. As for the Swedes--it is
changed him for another--Bernadotte, who promptly went mad--for no
Swede would ally himself with Russia unless he were mad."
would have done so; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing
alleged insanity of the Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that when
Russia is on her side Sweden is practically an island: but Napoleon
state of irritability in which a man has to talk, talk, and talk,
merely to convince himself that he is in the right. Balashev began
felt the necessity of replying; but, as a man, he shrank before the
transport of groundless wrath that had evidently seized Napoleon. He
knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon had any
"But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon. "I have
allies--the Poles. There are eighty thousand of them and they fight
like lions. And there will be two hundred thousand of them."
abruptly turned round, drew close to Balashev's face, and,
gesticulating rapidly and energetically with his white hands, almost
map of Europe!" he declared, his face pale and distorted by anger, and
he struck one of his small hands energetically with the other. "Yes, I
will throw you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and
will re-erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind
of Europe to allow to be destroyed. Yes, that is what will happen to
silently several times up and down the room, his fat shoulders
twitching.
He paused, looked ironically straight into Balashev's eyes, and said
Russian side things did not appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleon
was silent, still looking derisively at him and evidently not
expected from the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to
say, "I know it's your duty to say that, but you don't believe it
yourself. I have convinced you."
When Balashev had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox,
sniffed at it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal.
The door opened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully,
handkerchief. Napoleon, without giving them a glance, turned to
Balashev:
"that I am as devoted to him as before: I know him thoroughly and very
CHAPTER VII
you shall receive my letter," Balashev felt convinced that Napoleon
him--an insulted envoy--especially as he had witnessed his unseemly
anger. But, to his surprise, Balashev received, through Duroc, an
invitation to dine with the Emperor that day.
Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably. He not only showed
morning, but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashev. It was
evident that he had long been convinced that it was impossible for him
right, not because it harmonized with any idea of right and wrong, but
because he did it.
The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vilna,
where crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him.
From all the windows of the streets through which he rode, rugs,
flags, and his monogram were displayed, and the Polish ladies,
welcoming him, waved their handkerchiefs to him.
At dinner, having placed Balashev beside him, Napoleon not only
courtiers, one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought to
rejoice at his success. In the course of conversation he mentioned
as an interested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit,
but as if convinced that Balashev, as a Russian, must be flattered
true that Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches are
there in Moscow?" he asked.
And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundred
"Why such a quantity of churches?"
"But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign
of the backwardness of a people," said Napoleon, turning to
Caulaincourt for appreciation of this remark.
Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor.
"Every country has its own character," said he.
there is Spain, where there are also many churches and monasteries."
This reply of Balashev's, which hinted at the recent defeats of
the French in Spain, was much appreciated when he related it at
Alexander's court, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon's
dinner, where it passed unnoticed.
The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that
they were puzzled as to what Balashev's tone suggested. "If there is a
point we don't see it, or it is not at all witty," their expressions
seemed to say. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon
the direct road from there to Moscow passed. Balashev, who was on
to Rome," so all roads lead to Moscow: there were many roads, and
Balashev involuntarily flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this
reply, but hardly had he uttered the word Poltava before
After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, which
Napoleon sat down, toying with his Sevres coffee cup, and motioned
Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than
consider everyone his friend. It seemed to him that he was
surrounded by men who adored him: and he felt convinced that, after
his dinner, Balashev too was his friend and worshiper. Napoleon turned
to him with a pleasant, though slightly ironic, smile.
"They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied?
Strange, isn't it, General?" he said, evidently not doubting that this
Napoleon's, superiority to Alexander.
Balashev made no reply and bowed his head in silence.
deliberating," continued Napoleon with the same derisive and
self-confident smile. "What I can't understand," he went on, "is
enemies. That I do not... understand. Has he not thought that I may
the same?" and he turned inquiringly to Balashev, and evidently this
which was still fresh in him.
"And let him know that I will do so!" said Napoleon, rising and
pushing his cup away with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wurttemberg,
Baden, and Weimar relations out of Germany.... Yes. I'll drive them
out. Let him prepare an asylum for them in Russia!"
Balashev bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like to
make his bow and leave, and only listened because he could not help
he treated Balashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man now
fully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master's
"And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What
is the good of that? War is my profession, but his business is to
and down the room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly,
went up to Balashev and with a slight smile, as confidently,
quickly, and simply as if he were doing something not merely
To have one's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the
horses ready for the general?" he added, with a slight inclination
of his head in reply to Balashev's bow. "Let him have mine, he has a
The letter taken by Balashev was the last Napoleon sent to
Alexander. Every detail of the interview was communicated to the
Russian monarch, and the war began...
CHAPTER VIII
After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went to
Petersburg, on business as he told his family, but really to meet
Anatole Kuragin whom he felt it necessary to encounter. On reaching
Petersburg he inquired for Kuragin but the latter had already left the
his track. Anatole Kuragin promptly obtained an appointment from the
Petersburg Prince Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who was
should accompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old general
received an appointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.
Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge
Andrew arrived, the latter returned to Russia. In a new country,
acutely the more he tried to conceal its effects--the surroundings
could he no longer think the thoughts that had first come to him as he
lay gazing at the sky on the field of Austerlitz and had later
enlarged upon with Pierre, and which had filled his solitude at
Bogucharovo and then in Switzerland and Rome, but he even dreaded to
recall them and the bright and boundless horizons they had
eagerly the more those past interests were closed to him. It was as if
him had suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weighed him down,
in which all was clear, but nothing eternal or mysterious.
the simplest and most familiar. As a general on duty on Kutuzov's
staff, he applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and
having found Kuragin in Turkey, Prince Andrew did not think it
contempt for him and despite all the proofs he deduced to convince
himself that it was not worth stooping to a conflict with him--he knew
that when he did meet him he would not be able to resist calling him
was still unspent, weighed on his heart and poisoned the artificial
tranquillity which he managed to obtain in Turkey by means of
restless, plodding, and rather vainglorious and ambitious activity.
In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached
days and nights with a Wallachian woman--Prince Andrew asked Kutuzov
to transfer him to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was already weary of
Bolkonski's activity which seemed to reproach his own idleness, very
readily let him go and gave him a mission to Barclay de Tolly.
at Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on
thought, felt, and seen so much (having traveled both in the east
and the west), that on reaching Bald Hills it struck him as strange
same in every detail. He entered through the gates with their stone
same timid, plain maiden getting on in years, uselessly and
of joyous hopes for the future. She had merely become more
self-confident, Prince Andrew thought. Dessalles, the tutor he had
left a noticeable gap on one side of his mouth; in character he was
the same as ever, only showing still more irritability and
skepticism as to what was happening in the world. Little Nicholas
of his pretty little mouth just as the little princess used to do.
He alone did not obey the law of immutability in the enchanted,
inner relations of all these people had changed since Prince Andrew
Madmoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the other Princess
Mary, Dessalles, little Nicholas, and all the old nurses and maids.
During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together, but
they were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for
day, he was taciturn, and the old prince noticing this also became
In the evening, when Prince Andrew went to him and, trying to rouse
prince began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary, blaming her for
her superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne, who, he
said, was the only person really attached to him.
The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of
that by indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince
and that her life was very hard, but he also knew that he could not
help tormenting her and that she deserved it. "Why does Prince Andrew,
who sees this, say nothing to me about his sister? Does he think me
a scoundrel, or an old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own
daughter at a distance and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself? He
doesn't understand, so I must explain it, and he must hear me out,"
up with his daughter's unreasonable character.
"If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he was
wish to speak about it, but as you ask me I will give you my frank
irritable--as he was always liable to do of late--"I can only say that
if there are any misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless
smile disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew
could not get accustomed.
over! Eh?"
"Father, I did not want to judge," said Prince Andrew, in a hard and
say, that Mary is not to blame, but those to blame--the one to
blame--is that Frenchwoman."
"Ah, he has passed judgment... passed judgement!" said the old man
him to stay another day. That day he did not see his father, who did
day, before leaving, Prince Andrew went to his son's rooms. The boy,
curly-headed like his mother and glowing with health, sat on his knee,
and Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard, but fell
into a reverie without finishing the story. He thought not of this
sought in himself either remorse for having angered his father or
regret at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms
with him, and was horrified to find neither. What meant still more
to him was that he sought and did not find in himself the former
tenderness for his son which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the
"Well, go on!" said his son.
out of the room.
As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, and
especially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he
had been happy, weariness of life overcame him with its former
some work as soon as possible.
"Thank God that I can," replied Prince Andrew. "I am very sorry
"Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary. "Why do you say
Mademoiselle Bourienne says he has been asking about you...."
As soon as she began to speak of that, her lips trembled and her
tears began to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the
cause people misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess
who had ruined his own happiness.
"Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" she said, touching
his elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears.
one looks at the place where a familiar portrait hangs. "Sorrow is
sent by Him, not by men. Men are His instruments, they are not to
blame. If you think someone has wronged you, forget it and forgive! We
have no right to punish. And then you will know the happiness of
"If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. That is a woman's virtue.
But a man should not and cannot forgive and forget," he replied, and
though till that moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin, all his
unexpended anger suddenly swelled up in his heart.
"If Mary is already persuading me forgive, it means that I ought
long ago to have punished him," he thought. And giving her no
further reply, he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he
would meet Kuragin who he knew was now in the army.
knew how unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being
father, but that the longer he stayed now the more embittered their
"Good-by, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from God, and men
"Then it must be so!" thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the
avenue from the house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent creature,
is left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits.
growing up and rejoices in life, in which like everybody else he
will deceive or be deceived. And I am off to the army. Why? I myself
don't know. I want to meet that man whom I despise, so as to give
him a chance to kill and laugh at me!"
were all connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces. Only
another to Prince Andrew's mind.
Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the
end of June. The first army, with which was the Emperor, occupied
cut off by large French forces. Everyone was dissatisfied with the
general course of affairs in the Russian army, but no one
provinces.
six miles. Barclay de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from
the Emperor. He received Bolkonski stiffly and coldly and told him
in his foreign accent that he would mention him to the Emperor for a
his staff. Anatole Kuragin, whom Prince Andrew had hoped to find
with the army, was not there. He had gone to Petersburg, but Prince
Andrew was glad to hear this. His mind was occupied by the interests
of the center that was conducting a gigantic war, and he was glad to
be free for a while from the distraction caused by the thought of
Kuragin. During the first four days, while no duties were required
of him, Prince Andrew rode round the whole fortified camp and, by
the aid of his own knowledge and by talks with experts, tried to
Already from his military experience and what he had seen in the
Austrian campaign, he had come to the conclusion that in war the
most deeply considered plans have no significance and that all depends
are met, and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled. To
clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing his
deduced for himself the following of the state of affairs.
While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, the forces had been
secondly, the army under Bagration, and thirdly, the one commanded
by Tormasov. The Emperor was with the first army, but not as commander
would take command, but only that he would be with the army. The
Emperor, moreover, had with him not a commander in chief's staff but
the imperial headquarters staff. In attendance on him was the head
of the imperial staff, Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski, as well
as generals, imperial aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large
were in attendance on the Emperor without any definite appointments:
Arakcheev, the ex-Minister of War; Count Bennigsen, the senior general
Armfeldt, a Swedish general; Pfuel, the chief author of the plan of
Wolzogen--and many others. Though these men had no military
what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke,
Arakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or was given this or that advice and
did not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice
emanated from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it
these people, from a courtier's point of view (and in an Emperor's
vicinity all became courtiers), was clear to everyone. It was this:
the Emperor did not assume the title of commander in chief, but
Arakcheev was a faithful custodian to enforce order and acted as the
sovereign's bodyguard. Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilna
province who appeared to be doing the honors of the district, but
hand to replace Barclay. The Grand Duke was there because it suited
useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high esteem personally.
Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general full of
self-confidence, a quality that always influenced Alexander.
Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech. The
adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the
Emperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn
up the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander
to believe in the efficacy of that plan, was directing the whole
everyone else) was able to do.
unexpected ideas every day--especially the foreigners, who did so with
a boldness characteristic of people employed in a country not their
own--there were many secondary personages accompanying the army
because their principals were there.
Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless,
brilliant, and proud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the following
sharply defined subdivisions of and parties:
The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents--military
theorists who believed in a science of war with immutable laws--laws
accordance with precise laws defined by a pseudo-theory of war, and
they saw only barbarism, ignorance, or evil intention in every
The second party was directly opposed to the first; one extreme,
as always happens, was met by representatives of the other. The
members of this party were those who had demanded an advance from
Vilna into Poland and freedom from all prearranged plans. Besides
being advocates of bold action, this section also represented
were Russians: Bagration, Ermolov (who was beginning to come to the
being circulated, that as a great favor he had petitioned the
Emperor to make him a German. The men of that party, remembering
Suvorov, said that what one had to do was not to reason, or stick pins
into maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep him out of Russia, and
that undoubtedly war, particularly against such a genius as
Bonaparte (they called him Bonaparte now), needs most deeply devised
was a genius, but at the same time it had to be acknowledged that
the theorists are often one sided, and therefore one should not
then choose a middle course. They insisted on the retention of the
nor the other could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherents
of this third party.
Tsarevich, who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz,
where he had ridden out at the head of the Guards, in his casque and
gallantly; but unexpectedly finding himself in the front line had
feared Napoleon, recognized his strength and their own weakness, and
will come of all this! We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall
abandon Drissa. The only reasonable thing left to do is to conclude
peace as soon as possible, before we are turned out of Petersburg."
support also in Petersburg and from the chancellor, Rumyantsev, who,
de Tolly, not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander in
honest, practical man and we have nobody better. Give him real
power, for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of
army is well organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa
Barclay is now to be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost, for
Bennigsen showed his incapacity already in 1807."
The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that at
any rate there was no one more active and experienced than
Bennigsen eventually. Let the others make mistakes now!" said they,
the better. It will at any rate be understood all the sooner that
things cannot go on like this. What is wanted is not some Barclay or
whom Napoleon himself did justice--a man whose authority would be
were particularly many round Alexander--generals and imperial
monarch but as a man, adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly, as
Rostov had done in 1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtues
but all human capabilities as well. These men, though enchanted with
the sovereign for refusing the command of the army, yet blamed him for
adored sovereign should abandon his diffidence and openly announce
theoreticians and practical men where necessary, would himself lead
pitch.
The eighth and largest group, which in its enormous numbers was to
Bennigsen, but only the one most essential thing--as much advantage
conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor's
headquarters, it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at
would today agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and the
day after, merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor,
wished to gain some advantage would attract the Emperor's attention by
loudly advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day
A third, in the absence of opponents, between two councils would
simply solicit a special gratuity for his faithful services, well
knowing that at that moment people would be too busy to refuse him.
A fourth while seemingly overwhelmed with work would often come
accidentally under the Emperor's eye. A fifth, to achieve his
on the correctness or falsity of some newly emerging opinion and for
All the men of this party were fishing for rubles, decorations,
and promotions, and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of
Amid the uncertainties of the position, with the menace of serious
largest party of those preoccupied with personal interests imparted
great confusion and obscurity to the common task. Whatever question
arose, a swarm of these drones, without having finished their
buzzing on a previous theme, flew over to the new one and by their hum
to raise its voice. This was the party of the elders, reasonable men
of those conflicting opinions, were able to take a detached view of
of escape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.
The men of this party said and thought that what was wrong
resulted chiefly from the Emperor's presence in the army with his
indefinite, conditional, and unsteady fluctuation of relations,
which is in place at court but harmful in an army; that a sovereign
should reign but not command the army, and that the only way out of
the position would be for the Emperor and his court to leave the army;
that the mere presence of the Emperor paralyzed the action of fifty
thousand men required to secure his personal safety, and that the
very best one trammeled by the presence and authority of the monarch.
Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa,
Shishkov, the Secretary of State and one of the chief
representatives of this party, wrote a letter to the Emperor which
Arakcheev and Balashev agreed to sign. In this letter, availing
people of the capital--that the Emperor should leave the army.
them to defend their country--the very incitement which was the
and accepted by him, as a pretext for quitting the army.
CHAPTER X
Barclay, one day at dinner, informed Bolkonski that the sovereign
that evening.
News was received at the Emperor's quarters that very day of a fresh
subsequently found to be false. And that morning Colonel Michaud had
ridden round the Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had
pointed out to him that this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel,
and till then considered a chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which
destruction of the Russian army.
house of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river.
Emperor's aide-de-camp, received Bolkonski and informed him that the
gone a second time that day to inspect the fortifications of the
Drissa camp, of the suitability of which serious doubts were beginning
novel in his hand. This room had probably been a music room; there was
still an organ in it on which some rugs were piled, and in one
adjutant was also there and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding,
evidently exhausted by work or by feasting. Two doors led from the
another, on the right, to the study. Through the first door came the
sound of voices conversing in German and occasionally in French. In
that drawing room were gathered, by the Emperor's wish, not a military
council (the Emperor preferred indefiniteness), but certain persons
council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor personally.
Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon had referred
to as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein who was
an opportunity of getting a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soon
after himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped a
minute to speak to Chernyshev.
which fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Prince
Andrew, though he saw him now for the first time. There was about
theorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was more
typical than any of them. Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German
Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned, of coarse, robust
build, broad in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His face
hastily brushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind in
quaint little tufts. He entered the room, looking restlessly and
angrily around, as if afraid of everything in that large apartment.
Awkwardly holding up his sword, he addressed Chernyshev and asked in
German where the Emperor was. One could see that he wished to pass
through the rooms as quickly as possible, finish with the bows and
would feel at home. He nodded hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, and
fortifications that he, Pfuel, had planned in accord with his
theory. He muttered something to himself abruptly and in a bass voice,
as self-assured Germans do--it might have been "stupid fellow"... or
"the whole affair will be ruined," or "something absurd will come of
Andrew was just back from Turkey where the war had terminated so
fortunately. Pfuel barely glanced--not so much at Prince Andrew as
past him--and said, with a laugh: "That must have been a fine tactical
interview with Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz
one of those hopelessly and immutably self-confident men,
because only Germans are self-confident on the basis of an abstract
notion--science, that is, the supposed knowledge of absolute truth.
both in mind and body, as irresistibly attractive to men and women. An
Englishman is self-assured, as being a citizen of the best-organized
state in the world, and therefore as an Englishman always knows what
he should do and knows that all he does as an Englishman is
undoubtedly correct. An Italian is self-assured because he is
German's self-assurance is worst of all, stronger and more repulsive
absolute truth.
Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a science--the theory of
oblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the
Great's wars, and all he came across in the history of more recent
warfare seemed to him absurd and barbarous--monstrous collisions in
that war. On the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were,
characteristically gleeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said the
theoreticians who so love their theory that they lose sight of the
him hate everything practical, and he would not listen to it. He was
theory.
He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about the
will go wrong, and who is not displeased that it should be so. The
unbrushed tufts of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed
hair on his temples expressed this most eloquently.
CHAPTER XI
pausing, went into the study, giving instructions to his adjutant as
on to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign.
Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where the
Emperor, who looked fatigued, was dismounting. Marquis Paulucci was
talking to him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head
bent to the left, was listening with a dissatisfied air. The Emperor
himself, "the man who advised the Drissa camp--I see no alternative
but the lunatic asylum or the gallows!"
Without heeding the end of the Italian's remarks, and as though
graciously.
"I am very glad to see you! Go in there where they are meeting,
The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince Peter
Mikhaylovich Volkonski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behind
accompanied Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawing
room where the council was assembled.
Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position, as it
questions on which he wished to hear the opinion of the gentlemen
present. What had happened was that news (which afterwards proved to
The first to speak was General Armfeldt who, to meet the
this was inexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, could
have an opinion), but he urged that at this point the army should
unite and there await the enemy. It was plain that Armfeldt had
thought out that plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to
answer the questions put--which, in fact, his plan did not answer-
long as it was quite unknown what character the war would take. Some
disputed his arguments, others defended them. Young Count Toll
objected to the Swedish general's views more warmly than anyone
else, and in the course of the dispute drew from his side pocket a
well-filled notebook, which he asked permission to read to them. In
different from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campaign. In answer to
Toll, Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged,
trap (as he called the Drissa camp) in which we were situated.
(his "bridge" in court relations), were silent. Pfuel only snorted
himself by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing. So when
opinion, he merely said:
"Why ask me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position
with an exposed rear, or why not this Italian gentleman's attack--very
fine, or a retreat, also good! Why ask me?" said he. "Why, you
Emperor's name that he asked his opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly
growing animated, began to speak:
"Everything has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybody
his bony fingers. "What is the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!"
He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that no
eventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that
everything had been foreseen, and that if the enemy were really
French. Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French
laughing sarcastically, he demonstrated, and at last contemptuously
various ways the accuracy of a problem that has already been proved.
Wolzogen took his place and continued to explain his views in
your excellency?" But Pfuel, like a man heated in a fight who
strikes those on his own side, shouted angrily at his own supporter,
"Well, of course, what more is there to explain?"
French. Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained to
Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,
nursed no hatred against anyone, and only desired that the plan,
He was ridiculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspired
not been noticeable at the council of war in 1805: there was now a
panic fear of Napoleon's genius, which, though concealed, was
noticeable in every rejoinder. Everything was assumed to be possible
for Napoleon, they expected him from every side, and invoked his
consider Napoleon a barbarian like everyone else who opposed his
and the way Paulucci had allowed himself to speak of him to the
Emperor, but above all from a certain desperation in Pfuel's own
expressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuel himself
concealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he was
evidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of verifying his
world was slipping away from him.
The discussions continued a long time, and the longer they lasted
the more heated became the disputes, culminating in shouts and
conclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listening to
this polyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, and
activities--the idea that there is not and cannot be any science of
is possible about a matter the conditions and circumstances of which
are unknown and cannot be defined, especially when the strength of the
acting forces cannot be ascertained? No one was or is able to
time, and no one can gauge the force of this or that detachment.
Sometimes--when there is not a coward at the front to shout, 'We are
cut off!' and start running, but a brave and jolly lad who shouts,
'Hurrah!'--a detachment of five thousand is worth thirty thousand,
everything depends on innumerable conditions, the significance of
which is determined at a particular moment which arrives no one
knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Paulucci says
worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it,
one plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and the
who can order bread to be brought up at the right time and say who
men are invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatter
absent-minded men. Bagration was the best, Napoleon himself admitted
face on the field of Austerlitz. Not only does a good army commander
not need any special qualities, on the contrary he needs the absence
of the highest and best human attributes--love, poetry, tenderness,
not have sufficient patience), and only then will he be a brave
leader. God forbid that he should be humane, should love, or pity,
theory of their 'genius' was invented for them long ago because they
of being useful."
So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and he
roused himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving.
At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he
CHAPTER XII
from his parents in which they told him briefly of Natasha's illness
and the breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which they
to retire from the army and return home. On receiving this letter,
Nicholas did not even make any attempt to get leave of absence or to
retire from the army, but wrote to his parents that he was sorry
Natasha was ill and her engagement broken off, and that he would do
"Adored friend of my soul!" he wrote. "Nothing but honor could
the campaign, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades'
duty to the Fatherland. But this shall be our last separation. Believe
you, I will throw up everything and fly to you, to press you forever
to my ardent breast."
It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campaign that
the Christmas holidays and Sonya's love, had opened out to him a vista
of tranquil rural joys and peace such as he had never known before,
beginning, and he had to remain with his regiment. And since it had to
be so, Nicholas Rostov, as was natural to him, felt contented with the
life.
On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been joyfully
welcomed by his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought back
from the Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him
The campaign began, the regiment was moved into Poland on double
was infected with the merrily excited mood that goes with the
position in the regiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasures
and interests of military service, though he knew that sooner or later
state, political and strategic. Each step of the retreat was
sufficient supplies was a very simple and agreeable business.
It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness,
things looked bad chanced to enter anyone's head, he tried to be as
cheerful as befits a good soldier and not to think of the general
trend of affairs, but only of the task nearest to hand. First they
camped gaily before Vilna, making acquaintance with the Polish
landowners, preparing for reviews and being reviewed by the Emperor
and destroy any provisions they could not carry away with them.
Sventsyani was remembered by the hussars only as the drunken camp, a
carpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostov remembered Sventsyani,
because on the first day of their arrival at that small town he
men of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrels
of old beer. From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther to
Drissa, and thence again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier
of Russia proper.
On the thirteenth of July the Pavlograds took part in a serious
action for the first time.
On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavy
storm of rain and hail. In general, the summer of 1812 was
remarkable for its storms.
The two Pavlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye,
which was already in ear but had been completely trodden down by
hastily constructed shelter. An officer of their regiment, with long
mustaches extending onto his cheeks, who after riding to the staff had
exploit?"
And the officer gave them details of the Saltanov battle, which he
Rostov, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the water
trickled down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasional
glance at Ilyin, who was pressing close to him. This officer, a lad of
before. Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in everything and adored him
as a girl might have done.
Zdrzhinski, the officer with the long mustache, spoke
of how a deed worthy of antiquity had been performed by General
Raevski. He recounted how Raevski had led his two sons onto the dam
he was hearing, though with no intention of contradicting it. Since
men always lie when describing military exploits, as he himself had
know that nothing happens in war at all as we can imagine or relate
it. And so he did not like Zdrzhinski's tale, nor did he like
silence. "In the first place, there must have been such a confusion
and crowding on the dam that was being attacked that if Raevski did
lead his sons there, it could have had no effect except perhaps on
some dozen men nearest to him," thought he, "the rest could not have
did see it would not have been much stimulated by it, for what had
they to do with Raevski's tender paternal feelings when their own
skins were in danger? And besides, the fate of the Fatherland did
not depend on whether they took the Saltanov dam or not, as we are
told was the case at Thermopylae. So why should he have made such a
to me but a nice lad, but would have tried to put them somewhere under
cover," Nicholas continued to think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But
gained experience. He knew that this tale redounded to the glory of
accordingly.
"I can't stand this any more," said Ilyin, noticing that Rostov
did not relish Zdrzhinski's conversation. "My stockings and shirt...
rain seems less heavy."
Ilyin went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.
back to the shanty.
yards away there's a tavern where ours have already gathered. We can
Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty
wife in the early days of their marriage, took her about with him
wherever the hussar regiment went and his jealousy had become a
Rostov threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka to
right through it--set off with Ilyin in the lessening rain and the
darkness that was occasionally rent by distant lightning.
"Rostov, where are you?"
"Here. What lightning!" they called to one another.
CHAPTER XIII
In the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, there
were already some five officers. Mary Hendrikhovna, a plump little
blonde German, in a dressing jacket and nightcap, was sitting on a
broad bench in the front corner. Her husband, the doctor, lay asleep
behind her. Rostov and Ilyin, on entering the room, were welcomed with
merry shouts and laughter.
"And why do you stand there gaping?"
Rostov and Ilyin hastened to find a corner where they could change
into dry clothes without offending Mary Hendrikhovna's modesty. They
officers would on no account yield their position. Mary Hendrikhovna
brought their kits, changed their wet things for dry ones.
A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove. A board was
found, fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small
having asked Mary Hendrikhovna to preside, they all crowded round her.
One offered her a clean handkerchief to wipe her charming hands,
damp, another hung his coat over the window to keep out the draft, and
yet another waved the flies off her husband's face, lest he should
"Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhovna, smiling timidly and
"Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one must look
to cutting off a leg or an arm for me."
held only six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasanter
Hendrikhovna's plump little hands with their short and not overclean
soon left their game and came over to the samovar, yielding to the
general mood of courting Mary Hendrikhovna. She, seeing herself
surrounded by such brilliant and polite young men, beamed with
There was only one spoon, sugar was more plentiful than anything
Hendrikhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn. Rostov
Hendrikhovna to stir it.
as if everything she said and everything the others said was very
amusing and had a double meaning.
Mary Hendrikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which
"Use your finger, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," said
Rostov.
Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it
to Mary Hendrikhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger.
"This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your finger in it and I'll
drew lots to settle who should make up her set. At Rostov's suggestion
it was agreed that whoever became "King" should have the right to kiss
Mary Hendrikhovna's hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill and
reheat the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke.
"Well, but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is 'King'?" asked Ilyin.
nothing entertaining or amusing in what was going on. His face was sad
and depressed. Without greeting the officers, he scratched himself and
asked to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way. As soon
as he had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter
thereby became still more attractive to them. Returning from the yard,
the doctor told his wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, and
looked at him in alarm, awaiting her sentence) that the rain had
ceased and they must go to sleep in their covered cart, or
idea, doctor!"
"I'll stand guard on it myself!" said Ilyin.
two nights," replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside his
wife, waiting for the game to end.
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers
laughter, for which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts. When
he had gone, taking his wife with him, and had settled down with her
in their covered cart, the officers lay down in the tavern, covering
themselves with their wet cloaks, but they did not sleep for a long
time; now they exchanged remarks, recalling the doctor's uneasiness
covering his head, tried to go to sleep, but some remark would
of unreasoning, merry, childlike laughter.
CHAPTER XIV
of Ostrovna. Still laughing and talking, the officers began
hurriedly getting ready and again boiled some muddy water
in the samovar. But Rostov went off to his squadron without waiting
still moist. As they left the tavern in the twilight of the dawn,
Rostov and Ilyin both glanced under the wet and glistening leather
visible and her sleepy breathing audible.
"A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all the gravity of a boy of
sixteen.
command was heard to "mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves and
hussars, with clanking sabers and subdued talk, their horses' hoofs
splashing in the mud, defiled in fours and moved along the broad
road planted with birch trees on each side, following the infantry and
Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddening in the east, were scudding
grass which always grows by country roadsides became clearly
visible, still wet with the night's rain; the drooping branches of the
birches, also wet, swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of
visible. Rostov, always closely followed by Ilyin, rode along the side
of the road between two rows of birch trees.
sportsman, he had lately procured himself a large, fine, mettlesome,
Donets horse, dun-colored, with light mane and tail, and when he
pleasure to him, and he thought of the horse, of the morning, of the
Formerly, when going into action, Rostov had felt afraid; now he had
not the least feeling of fear. He was fearless, not because he had
because he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger. He
had grown accustomed when going into action to think about anything
but what would seem most likely to interest him--the impending danger.
he reproached himself with cowardice, he had not been able to do this,
the birch trees, occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met
his hand, sometimes touching his horse's side with his foot, or,
riding behind him, with as calm and careless an air as though he
were merely out for a ride. He glanced with pity at the excited face
of Ilyin, who talked much and in great agitation. He knew from
was suffering and knew that only time could help him.
As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the
clouds, the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the
vertically now, and all was still. The whole sun appeared on the
horizon and disappeared behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it.
A few minutes later it reappeared brighter still from behind the top
of the cloud, tearing its edge. Everything grew bright and
sound of guns ahead of them.
Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of
that firing, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy's adjutant came galloping from
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery--which
had also quickened their pace--rode down a hill, and passing through
an empty and deserted village again ascended. The horses began to
lather and the men to flush.
from in front.
And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the left
were visible through the wonderfully clear air, brightly illuminated
seen the enemy's columns and guns. Our advanced line, already in
action, could be heard briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in
the dale.
strains of the merriest music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots,
detonators and exploding them.
cannonade began. Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the
up the hill to the guns.
After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the Uhlans.
"Form column! Prepare to charge!"
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the
cavalry to pass. The Uhlans started, the streamers on their spears
As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered
up the hill to support the battery. As they took the places vacated by
the Uhlans, bullets came from the front, whining and whistling, but
The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even more
pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds
of firing. Drawing himself up, he viewed the field of battle opening
out before him from the hill, and with his whole soul followed the
movement of the Uhlans. They swooped down close to the French
dragoons, something confused happened there amid the smoke, and five
had occupied but more to the left, and among the orange-colored Uhlans
on chestnut horses and behind them, in a large group, blue French
dragoons on gray horses could be seen.
Rostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the first to catch
sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans. Nearer and
pursuing them. He could already see how these men, who looked so small
at the foot of the hill, jostled and overtook one another, waving
their arms and their sabers in the air.
Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. He
felt instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons
made it must be done now, at that very moment, or it would be too
like himself with eyes fixed on the cavalry below them.
"Andrew Sevastyanych!" said Rostov. "You know, we could crush
them...."
Rostov, without waiting to hear him out, touched his horse, galloped
to the front of his squadron, and before he had time to finish
He acted as he did when hunting, without reflecting or considering. He
saw the dragoons near and that they were galloping in disorder; he
moment and that if he let it slip it would not return. The bullets
his horse, gave the word of command, and immediately, hearing behind
him the tramp of the horses of his deployed squadron, rode at full
trot downhill toward the dragoons. Hardly had they reached the
bottom of the hill before their pace instinctively changed to a
gallop, which grew faster and faster as they drew nearer to our Uhlans
and the French dragoons who galloped after them. The dragoons were now
close at hand. On seeing the hussars, the foremost began to turn,
while those behind began to halt. With the same feeling with which
Donets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the dragoons'
disordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, another who was on foot flung
himself to the ground to avoid being knocked over, and a riderless
horse fell in among the hussars. Nearly all the French dragoons were
galloping back. Rostov, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed
it, and almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that
he would immediately overtake the enemy he had selected. That
Frenchman, by his uniform an officer, was going at a gallop, crouching
on his gray horse and urging it on with his saber. In another moment
Rostov's horse dashed its breast against the hindquarters of the
officer's horse, almost knocking it over, and at the same instant
with it.
The instant he had done this, all Rostov's animation vanished. The
officer fell, not so much from the blow--which had but slightly cut
his arm above the elbow--as from the shock to his horse and from
whom he had vanquished. The French dragoon officer was hopping with
eyes, screwed up with fear as if he every moment expected another
blow, gazed up at Rostov with shrinking terror. His pale and
mud-stained face--fair and young, with a dimple in the chin and
decided what to do with him, the officer cried, "I surrender!" He
hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the stirrup and
did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov's face. Some
wounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up his
horse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round
front, the French infantry were firing as they ran. The hussars
with the rest, aware of an unpleasant feeling of depression in his
heart. Something vague and confused, which he could not at all account
he had dealt him.
Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returning hussars, sent for
Rostov, thanked him, and said he would report his gallant deed to
the Emperor and would recommend him for a St. George's Cross. When
without orders, felt sure his commander was sending for him to
and promise of a reward should therefore have struck him all the
Have I disgraced myself in any way? No, that's not it." Something
else, resembling remorse, tormented him. "Yes, oh yes, that French
officer with the dimple. And I remember how my arm paused when I
raised it."
Rostov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them to
sitting in his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked
anxiously about him; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called
a wound. He glanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved his
of shame.
Rostov, without being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and
Rostov was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his,
which to his amazement had gained him the St. George's Cross and
could not at all understand. "So others are even more afraid than I
am!" he thought. "So that's all there is in what is called heroism!
trembled. And they have given me a St. George's Cross.... I can't make
But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could
in the service, as often happens, turned in his favor. After the
affair at Ostrovna he was brought into notice, received command of
an hussar battalion, and when a brave officer was needed he was
On receiving news of Natasha's illness, the countess, though not
rest of the household, and the whole family moved from Marya
Dmitrievna's house to their own and settled down in town.
conduct and the breaking off of her engagement, receded into the
or sleep, grew visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors made them
feel, was in danger. They could not think of anything but how to
help her. Doctors came to see her singly and in consultation, talked
much in French, German, and Latin, blamed one another, and
prescribed a great variety of medicines for all the diseases known
could not know the disease Natasha was suffering from, as no disease
suffered by a live man can be known, for every living person has his
complicated disease, unknown to medicine--not a disease of the
to the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard that he is unable to
work his charms) because the business of their lives was to cure,
and they received money for it and had spent the best years of their
their minds by the fact that they saw they were really useful, as in
small doses), but they were useful, necessary, and indispensable
because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and of those who
loved her--and that is why there are, and always will be,
satisfied that eternal human need for hope of relief, for sympathy,
suffering. They satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in
nurse to have the aching spot rubbed or kissed, and it feels better
when this is done. The child cannot believe that the strongest and
wisest of its people have no remedy for its pain, and the hope of
relief and the expression of its mother's sympathy while she rubs
the bump comforts it. The doctors were of use to Natasha because
they kissed and rubbed her bump, assuring her that it would soon
pass if only the coachman went to the chemist's in the Arbat and got a
powder and some pills in a pretty box of a ruble and seventy kopeks,
What would Sonya and the count and countess have done, how would
those pills to give by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken
cutlets, and all the other details of life ordered by the doctors, the
carrying out of which supplied an occupation and consolation to the
family circle? How would the count have borne his dearly loved
daughter's illness had he not known that it was costing him a thousand
rubles, and that he would not grudge thousands more to benefit her, or
had he not been able to explain the details of how Metivier and Feller
diagnosed them even better? What would the countess have done had
she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid for not strictly
obeying the doctor's orders?
"You'll never get well like that," she would say, forgetting her
ready to carry out all the doctor's injunctions with precision, and
that she still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time
when the slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be
even pleasant to be able to show, by disregarding the orders, that she
regardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her. But when he
him, he assumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head said
that though there was danger, he had hopes of the effect of this
last medicine and one must wait and see, that the malady was chiefly
mental, but... And the countess, trying to conceal the action from
herself and from him, slipped a gold coin into his hand and always
The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she ate little, slept
little, coughed, and was always low-spirited. The doctors said that
she could not get on without medical treatment, so they kept her in
the stifling atmosphere of the town, and the Rostovs did not move to
In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders
out of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was
deprived of the country life to which she was accustomed, youth
prevailed. Natasha's grief began to be overlaid by the impressions
of daily life, it ceased to press so painfully on her heart, it
CHAPTER XVII
external forms of pleasure--balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters-
herself, tears choked her: tears of remorse, tears at the recollection
of those pure times which could never return, tears of vexation that
been so happy. Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a
blasphemy, in face of her sorrow. Without any need of
self-restraint, no wish to coquet ever entered her head. She said
and felt at that time that no man was more to her than Nastasya
Ivanovna, the buffoon. Something stood sentinel within her and forbade
carefree girlish life that had been so full of hope. The previous
autumn, the hunting, "Uncle," and the Christmas holidays spent with
Nicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenest and most
day of that time! But it was gone forever. Her presentiment at the
for any enjoyment would not return again. Yet it was necessary to live
on.
formerly imagined, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in the
world. But this was not enough. She knew that, and asked herself,
burden or a hindrance to anyone, but wanted nothing for herself. She
kept away from everyone in the house and felt at ease only with her
the house and of those who came to see them was glad to see only one
person, Pierre. It would have been impossible to treat her with more
delicacy, greater care, and at the same time more seriously than did
Count Bezukhov. Natasha unconsciously felt this delicacy and so
was no merit in his kindness. Sometimes Natasha noticed
embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,
that something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her.
She noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and
to her. After those involuntary words--that if he were free he would
have asked on his knees for her hand and her love--uttered at a moment
his feelings; and it seemed plain to her that those words, which had
then so comforted her, were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words
are spoken to comfort a crying child. It was not because Pierre was
a married man, but because Natasha felt very strongly with him that
moral barrier the absence of which she had experienced with Kuragin
that it never entered her head that the relations between him and
herself could lead to love on her part, still less on his, or even
man and a woman of which she had known several instances.
at the shrines of the Moscow saints. She suggested that Natasha should
fast and prepare for Holy Communion, and Natasha gladly welcomed the
idea. Despite the doctor's orders that she should not go out early
in the morning, Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for the
sacrament, not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostov
family by attending three services in their own house, but as Agrafena
Ivanovna did, by going to church every day for a week and not once
missing Vespers, Matins, or Mass.
The countess was pleased with Natasha's zeal; after the poor results
prayer might help her daughter more than medicines and, though not
without fear and concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to
to come to wake Natasha at three in the morning, but generally found
her already awake. She was afraid of being late for Matins. Hastily
mantilla, Natasha, shivering in the fresh air, went out into the
deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn. By Agrafena
Ivanovna's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their own parish,
but at a church where, according to the devout Agrafena Ivanovna,
the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life. There were never
customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into the
screen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her,
of humility before something great and incomprehensible, seized her
light falling from the window, she listened to the words of the
service which she tried to follow with understanding. When she
understood them her personal feeling became interwoven in the
necessary to believe and to commit oneself to God, whom she felt
guiding her soul at those moments. She crossed herself, bowed low, and
those of repentance. On her way home at an early hour when she met
everybody within the houses was still asleep, Natasha experienced a
During the whole week she spent in this way, that feeling grew every
so great that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.
the powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously.
"She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening," said he,
evidently sincerely satisfied with his success. "Only, please be
particular about it.
freshened up very much."
room.
CHAPTER XVIII
At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the
war began to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the
Emperor to the people, and of his coming himself from the army to
Moscow. And as up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had
the position of Russia. It was said that the Emperor was leaving the
army because it was in danger, it was said that Smolensk had
On the eleventh of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto was
received but was not yet in print, and Pierre, who was at the
Rostopchin.
the shouts of hawkers, the light and gay summer clothes of the
crowd, the dusty leaves of the trees on the boulevard, the sounds of
sunshine were all full of that summer languor, that content and
discontent with the present, which is most strongly felt on a
bright, hot day in town. All the Moscow notabilities, all the Rostovs'
something to happen, many wealthy families who usually left town for
their country estates had not gone away that summer. As Natasha, at
her mother's side, passed through the crowd behind a liveried
footman who cleared the way for them, she heard a young man speaking
about her in too loud a whisper.
"That's Rostova, the one who..."
"She's much thinner, but all the same she's pretty!"
everyone who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened to
her. With a sinking heart, wretched as she always was now when she
found herself in a crowd, Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with
black lace walked--as women can walk--with the more repose and
satisfaction as it used to. On the contrary it tormented her more than
summer day in town. "It's Sunday again--another week past," she
thought, recalling that she had been here the Sunday before, "and
that now I am good. I used to be bad, but now I know I am good," she
thought, "but yet my best years are slipping by and are no good to
anyone." She stood by her mother's side and exchanged nods with
crossing herself properly but in a cramped manner, and again she
thought with vexation that she was herself being judged and was
judging others, and suddenly, at the sound of the service, she felt
soul was again lost to her.
A comely, fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that
mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the
joyous but oppressive feeling agitated her.
forever, forever!" she pleaded.
loud and solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer...
"In peace let us pray unto the Lord."
"As one community, without distinction of class, without enmity,
united by brotherly love--let us pray!" thought Natasha.
"For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our
souls."
"For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us,"
When they prayed for the warriors, she thought of her brother and
Denisov. When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, she
remembered Prince Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive her
us, she prayed for the members of her own family, her father and
mother and Sonya, realizing for the first time how wrongly she had
her enemies and people who hated her, in order to pray for them. She
dealings with her father, and always at the thought of enemies and
those who hated her she remembered Anatole who had done her so much
harm--and though he did not hate her she gladly prayed for him as
for an enemy. Only at prayer did she feel able to think clearly and
calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole, as men for whom her feelings were
for the Imperial family and the Synod, she bowed very low and made the
understand, still she could not doubt, and at any rate loved the
governing Synod and prayed for it.
When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over
his breast and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to
submit myself to Thy will!" she thought. "I want nothing, wish for
nothing; teach me what to do and how to use my will! Take me, take
herself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting some
invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from
herself, from her regrets, desires, remorse, hopes, and sins.
with an effort. Everybody followed his example and they looked at
one another in surprise. Then came the prayer just received from the
"Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" began the priest in
that voice, clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only the
"Lord God of might, God of our salvation! Look this day in mercy and
waste the whole world, rises against us; these lawless men are
gathered together to overthrow Thy kingdom, to destroy Thy dear
Jerusalem, Thy beloved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to overthrow
long shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they wield unlawful
"Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee; strengthen with Thy might
be mindful of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according to
his righteousness, and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless
by Thine almighty hand, and give him victory over his enemy, even as
David over Goliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the hands
of those who have armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird their loins
with strength for the fight. Take up the spear and shield and arise to
us, may they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust
before the wind, and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them
plots they have laid in secret be turned against them; let them fall
able to save both great and small; Thou art God, and man cannot
loving-kindness which are from of old; turn not Thy face from us,
but be gracious to our unworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thy
another, arm us with unity of spirit in the righteous defense of the
heritage Thou gavest to us and to our fathers, and let not the scepter
it and be put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that
them swiftly beneath the feet of Thy faithful servants! For Thou art
Ghost, now and forever, world without end. Amen."
In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her
Amalek, of Gideon over Midian, and of David over Goliath, and about
without fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer.
She shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of
righteousness, for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope,
been wishing she had more of them that she might pray for them. But
neither could she doubt the righteousness of the prayer that was being
read on bended knees. She felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe
and especially of her own sins, and she prayed to God to forgive
happiness. And it seemed to her that God heard her prayer.
From the day when Pierre, after leaving the Rostovs' with
Natasha's grateful look fresh in his mind, had gazed at the comet that
seemed to be fixed in the sky and felt that something new was
vanity and uselessness of all earthly things, that had incessantly
tormented him, no longer presented itself. That terrible question
"Why?" "Wherefore?" which had come to him amid every occupation, was
question, but by her image. When he listened to, or himself took
part in, trivial conversations, when he read or heard of human
transient and incomprehensible--but he remembered her as he had last
the questions that had haunted him, but because his conception of
spiritual activity in which no one could be justified or guilty--a
realm of beauty and love which it was worth living for. Whatever
worldly baseness presented itself to him, he said to himself:
"Well, supposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar, and the
country and the Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that matter?
She smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again, and I love her,
Pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the same
Rostovs' there were other hours he had to spend somehow, and the
explain, took possession of him. He felt that the condition he was
in could not continue long, that a catastrophe was coming which
would change his whole life, and he impatiently sought everywhere
for signs of that approaching catastrophe. One of his brother Masons
had revealed to Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon,
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number
of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six
And in the fifth verse of the same chapter:
And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and
The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as
the Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and the
others tens, will have the following significance:
      a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   k
             t    u    v    w    x    y
                        z
                       160
in the Apocalypse. Moreover, by applying the same system to the
words quarante-deux,* which was the term allowed to the beast that
obtained; from which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon's
This prophecy pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what
and tried by the same system of using letters as numbers and adding
wrote the words L'Empereur Alexandre, La nation russe and added up
their numbers, but the sums were either more or less than 666. Once
and the article le, still without obtaining the desired result. Then
only five too much, and five was represented by e, the very letter
e, though incorrectly, Pierre got the answer he sought. L'russe
Besuhof made 666. This discovery excited him. How, or by what means,
of Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to
On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierre
he knew well, both the appeal to the people and the news from the
there a courier fresh from the army, an acquaintance of his own, who
often danced at Moscow balls.
"Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of something!" said the
Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father.
and his own most recent bulletin. Glancing through the army orders,
rewarded, the name of Nicholas Rostov, awarded a St. George's Cross of
the Fourth Class for courage shown in the Ostrovna affair, and in
happy by the news of their son's having received a decoration, so he
keeping the appeal, the bulletin, and the other orders to take with
him when he went to dinner.
Napoleon promised to be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn,
and the talk of the Emperor's being expected to arrive next day--all
aroused with fresh force that feeling of agitation and expectation
in Pierre which he had been conscious of ever since the appearance
of the comet, and especially since the beginning of the war.
He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done
of Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached
perpetual peace and the abolition of war, and secondly, by the fact
that when he saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform
and were talking patriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step.
number of the beast, 666; that his part in the great affair of setting
a limit to the power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemous
not to undertake anything, but wait for what was bound to come to
usual on Sundays.
He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had
he not been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried
He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering something. His coachman
footman rushed eagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take
his hat and stick. Pierre, from club habit, always left both hat and
stick in the anteroom.
The first person he saw in the house was Natasha. Even before he saw
her, while taking off his cloak, he heard her. She was practicing
solfa exercises in the music room. He knew that she had not sung since
worn at church, walking about the room singing. She had her back to
him when he opened the door, but when, turning quickly, she saw his
"That's capital!"
"How glad I am you've come! I am so happy today," she said, with the
old animation Pierre had not seen in her for along time. "You know
"Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don't want to interrupt
you," he added, and was about to go to the drawing room.
Natasha stopped him.
her eyes inquiringly on him.
"No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me?"
like to do anything you disapproved of. I believe in you completely.
me...." She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her
whispered the name hastily), "is in Russia, and in the army again.
What do you think?"--she was speaking hurriedly, evidently afraid
always have a bitter feeling toward me? What do you think? What do you
think?"
By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to the
himself but the best man in the world and free, he would ask on his
knees for her hand; and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and love
better than you; nobody could be! Had you not been there then, and now
Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her music
down the room.
Just then Petya came running in from the drawing room.
Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips
and resembled Natasha. He was preparing to enter the university, but
the hussars.
Petya had come rushing out to talk to his namesake about this
affair. He had asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted
in the hussars.
Pierre walked up and down the drawing room, not listening to what
Petya was saying.
"Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven's sake! You
"Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussars? I'll mention it, I'll bring
tomorrow... there's to be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility,
congratulate you!"
replied Pierre.
countess who entered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidently
expecting Natasha, who had left off singing but had not yet come
"On my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said.
"There he is, always losing everything!" remarked the countess.
Natasha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face
while still searching for the papers he glanced at her several times.
"No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left them there. I'll
had found them in Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked them
under the lining. Pierre was about to begin reading.
"No, after dinner," said the old count, evidently expecting much
At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new
chevalier of St. George, Shinshin told them the town news, of the
illness of the old Georgian princess, of Metivier's disappearance from
the story), and how Rostopchin let him go and assured the people
that he was "not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin."
"People are being arrested..." said the count. "I've told the
countess she should not speak French so much. It's not the time for it
now."
"And have you heard?" Shinshin asked. "Prince Golitsyn has engaged a
master to teach him Russian. It is becoming dangerous to speak
French in the streets."
"And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? If they call up the
not to grasp what was said. He looked at the count.
"Oh yes, the war," he said. "No! What sort of warrior should I make?
And yet everything is so strange, so strange! I can't make it out. I
don't know, I am very far from having military tastes, but in these
times no one can answer for himself."
After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy
chair and with a serious face asked Sonya, who was considered an
excellent reader, to read the appeal.
"To Moscow, our ancient Capital!
"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces. He
listened with closed eyes, heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages.
Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now at her father
Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. The
expression in the manifesto. In all these words she saw only that
fun of anything that gave him the opportunity: Sonya's reading, any
remark of the count's, or even the manifesto itself should no better
pretext present itself.
nobility, Sonya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the
and those freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear. May the
ruin he hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head, and may
"Yes, that's it!" cried the count, opening his moist eyes and
sniffing repeatedly, as if a strong vinaigrette had been held to his
sacrifice everything and begrudge nothing."
Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on
the count's patriotism, Natasha jumped up from her place and ran to
"What a darling our Papa is!" she cried, kissing him, and she
again looked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned
to her with her better spirits.
injured tone. "Everything seems funny to you, but this isn't at all
"A joke indeed!" put in the count. "Let him but say the word and
we'll all go.... We're not Germans!"
"But did you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre.
"Never mind what it's for...."
At this moment, Petya, to whom nobody was paying any attention, came
voice that was now deep and now shrill:
because I can't... that's all...."
The countess, in dismay, looked up to heaven, clasped her hands, and
turned angrily to her husband.
"Come, come!" said he. "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! You
he's going too. Besides, all the same I can't study now when..." Petya
stopped short, flushed till he perspired, but still got out the words,
"That'll do, that'll do--nonsense...."
"Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a glance at his
wife, who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son.
and the count moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probably
"Well, Peter Kirilych, let's go and have a smoke," he said.
Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natasha's unwontedly brilliant
eyes, continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look, had
"No, I think I'll go home."
often come nowadays as it is, and this girl of mine," said the count
"Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business..."
"Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and went out of the room.
looked challengingly into Pierre's eyes.
say it, and only blushed till the tears came, and lowered his eyes.
"Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No,
simply I have business...."
"Why? No, tell me!" Natasha began resolutely and suddenly stopped.
tried to smile but could not: his smile expressed suffering, and he
After the definite refusal he had received, Petya went to his room
and there locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea,
silent, morose, and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not to
notice anything.
Rostovs' domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him.
That morning Petya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair and
saying a word to anyone, took his cap and left the house by the back
door, trying to avoid notice. Petya decided to go straight to where
the Emperor was and to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting
wished to serve his country; that youth could be no hindrance to
prepared many fine things he meant to say to the gentleman-in-waiting.
It was on the very fact of being so young that Petya counted for
success in reaching the Emperor--he even thought how surprised
appear a grown-up man. But the farther he went and the more his
attention was diverted by the ever-increasing crowds moving toward the
Kremlin, the less he remembered to walk with the sedateness and
deliberation of a man. As he approached the Kremlin he even began to
avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck out his elbows in a
intentions with which he had come that in spite of all his
determination he had to give in, and stop while carriages passed in,
rumbling beneath the archway. Beside Petya stood a peasant woman, a
some time in the gateway, Petya tried to move forward in front of
the others without waiting for all the carriages to pass, and he began
efforts, angrily shouted at him:
"What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don't you see we're all
elbows to such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy corner
of the gateway.
Petya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulled up the
damp collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a
He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if
he were now to approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he
would not be admitted to the Emperor. But it was impossible to smarten
oneself up or move to another place, because of the crowd. One of
the generals who drove past was an acquaintance of the Rostovs', and
Petya thought of asking his help, but came to the conclusion that that
would not be a manly thing to do. When the carriages had all passed
in, the crowd, carrying Petya with it, streamed forward into the
Kremlin Square which was already full of people. There were people not
only in the square, but everywhere--on the slopes and on the roofs. As
soon as Petya found himself in the square he clearly heard the sound
For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads were
bared, and everyone rushed forward in one direction. Petya was being
"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and
pinched, but could see nothing except the people about him.
All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm.
A tradesman's wife standing beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ran
with her fingers.
"Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.
forward.
Quite beside himself, Petya, clinching his teeth and rolling his
eyes ferociously, pushed forward, elbowing his way and shouting
"hurrah!" as if he were prepared that instant to kill himself and
everyone else, but on both sides of him other people with similarly
ferocious faces pushed forward and everybody shouted "hurrah!"
"So this is what the Emperor is!" thought Petya. "No, I can't
petition him myself--that would be too bold." But in spite of this
backs of those in front he caught glimpses of an open space with a
strip of red cloth spread out on it; but just then the crowd swayed
too close to the procession: the Emperor was passing from the palace
to the Cathedral of the Assumption--and Petya unexpectedly received
such a blow on his side and ribs and was squeezed so hard that
suddenly everything grew dim before his eyes and he lost
with a tuft of gray hair at the back of his head and wearing a
holding him under the arm with one hand while warding off the pressure
of the crowd with the other.
The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption. The crowd
who stood nearest him attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him
on the raised platform of the cannon, and reproached those others
(whoever they might be) who had crushed him.
Killing people! Poor dear, he's as white as a sheet!"--various
Petya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain
obtained a place by the cannon from where he hoped to see the
Emperor who would be returning that way. Petya no longer thought of
be happy!
While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption-
Turks--the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared, selling
kvas, gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets (of which Petya was
much the shawl had cost; another was saying that all silk goods had
now got dear. The clerk who had rescued Petya was talking to a
functionary about the priests who were officiating that day with the
joking with some serf girls who were cracking nuts. All these
conversations, especially the joking with the girls, were such as
might have had a particular charm for Petya at his age, but they did
cannon--still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and
by his love for him. The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced
Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the
the young gentleman under his protection stopped him. The firing was
still proceeding when officers, generals, and gentlemen-in-waiting
came running out of the cathedral, and after them others in a more
leisurely manner: caps were again raised, and those who had run to
look at the cannon ran back again. At last four men in uniforms and
crowd again.
around him, but no one answered him, everybody was too excited; and
Petya, fixing on one of those four men, whom he could not clearly
see for the tears of joy that filled his eyes, concentrated all his
enthusiasm on him--though it happened not to be the Emperor-
frantically shouted "Hurrah!" and resolved that tomorrow, come what
might, he would join the army.
anything and was drenched with perspiration, yet he did not go home
but stood with that diminishing, but still considerable, crowd
windows, expecting he knew not what, and envying alike the notables he
footmen who served at table, glimpses of whom could be seen through
the windows.
"The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again."
The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit,
rose and went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya among them,
rushed toward the balcony.
"Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the crowd, and Petya
wept with joy.
broke off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A
and still more excited by the danger of being crushed, he rushed at
the biscuits. He did not know why, but he had to have a biscuit from
the Tsar's hand and he felt that he must not give way. He sprang
old woman did not consider herself defeated though she was lying on
already hoarse.
began to disperse.
"There! I said if only we waited--and so it was!" was being joyfully
said by various people.
Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing that
all the enjoyment of that day was over. He did not go straight home
from the Kremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who was
fifteen and was also entering the regiment. On returning home Petya
the service he would run away. And next day, Count Ilya Rostov--though
he had not yet quite yielded--went to inquire how he could arrange for
CHAPTER XXII
Two days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of
The great halls were full. In the first were the nobility and gentry
in their uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted
coats of blue cloth and wearing medals. In the noblemen's hall there
was an incessant movement and buzz of voices. The chief magnates sat
Emperor, but most of the gentry were strolling about the room.
All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the Club or in
their own houses, were in uniform--some in that of Catherine's day,
others in that of Emperor Paul, others again in the new uniforms of
Alexander's time or the ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the
both old and young. The old men, dim-eyed, toothless, bald, sallow,
and bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled, were especially striking. For
younger. On all these faces, as on the faces of the crowd Petya had
seen in the Square, there was a striking contradiction: the general
health, and so on.
nobleman's uniform that had become too tight for him. He was agitated;
this extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of the
merchant-class--les etats generaux (States-General)--evoked in him a
whole series of ideas he had long laid aside but which were deeply
Revolution. The words that had struck him in the Emperor's appeal-
that the sovereign was coming to the capital for consultation with his
people--strengthened this idea. And imagining that in this direction
strolled about watching and listening to conversations, but nowhere
finding any confirmation of the ideas that occupied him.
conversation, Pierre heard questions of where the marshals of the
nobility were to stand when the Emperor entered, when a ball should be
by districts or by whole provinces... and so on; but as soon as the
war was touched on, or what the nobility had been convened for, the
A middle-aged man, handsome and virile, in the uniform of a
crowd was pressing round him. Pierre went up to the circle that had
formed round the speaker and listened. Count Ilya Rostov, in a
military uniform of Catherine's time, was sauntering with a pleasant
smile among the crowd, with all of whom he was acquainted. He too
approval, as he always did, to what the speaker was saying. The
retired naval man was speaking very boldly, as was evident from the
people Pierre knew as the meekest and quietest of men walked away
disapprovingly or expressed disagreement with him. Pierre pushed his
the man was indeed a liberal, but of views quite different from his
own. The naval officer spoke in a particularly sonorous, musical,
and aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantly swallowing his r's and
"What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for the
Empewah? Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noble
awistocwacy of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show its
loyalty to our sov'weign the Empewah in other ways. Have we
did was to enwich the pwiests' sons and thieves and wobbahs...."
Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval.
wuined our farming! Bettah have another conscwiption... o' ou' men
was the way he referred to the Emperor) "need only say the word and
we'll all die fo' him!" added the orator with animation.
Pierre wanted to speak himself. He pushed forward, feeling stirred,
he opened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without a tooth in
his head, with a shrewd though angry expression, standing near the
first speaker, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to managing
"I imagine, sir," said he, mumbling with his toothless mouth,
"that we have been summoned here not to discuss whether it's best
with which our sovereign the Emperor has honored us. But to judge what
is best--conscription or the militia--we can leave to the supreme
authority...."
heart against the senator who was introducing this set and narrow
attitude into the deliberations of the nobility. Pierre stepped
forward and interrupted him. He himself did not yet know what he would
say, but he began to speak eagerly, occasionally lapsing into French
or expressing himself in bookish Russian.
honor of knowing, I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not
merely to express their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider
the means by which we can assist our Fatherland! I imagine," he went
on, warming to his subject, "that the Emperor himself would not be
satisfied to find in us merely owners of serfs whom we are willing
ourselves--and not to obtain from us any co-co-counsel."
*"Food for cannon."
Many persons withdrew from the circle, noticing the senator's
sarcastic smile and the freedom of Pierre's remarks. Only Count Rostov
officer, the senator, and in general with whatever speech he had
last heard.
which our army and our forces now are, and then..."
But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked
as a result of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw
"In the first place, I tell you we have no right to question the
years of age, whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies' and knew as
Pierre, interrupted Adraksin.
acting: there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroy
arise, every one of us will go, for our father the Tsar!" he
heard in the crowd. "We are Russians and will not grudge our blood
in defense of our faith, the throne, and the Fatherland! We must cease
raving if we are sons of our Fatherland! We will show Europe how
Russia rises to the defense of Russia!"
Pierre wished to reply, but could not get in a word. He felt that
his words, apart from what meaning they conveyed, were less audible
than the sound of his opponent's voice.
Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval;
several persons, briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end
Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money, his
voices shouted and talked at the same time, so that Count Rostov had
not time to signify his approval of them all, and the group increased,
largest hall and to the big table. Not only was Pierre's attempt to
speak unsuccessful, but he was rudely interrupted, pushed aside, and
not because they were displeased by the substance of his speech, which
had even been forgotten after the many subsequent speeches, but to
after the excited nobleman, and all in the same tone. Many spoke
(cries of "author! author!" were heard in the crowd), said that
"Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!" was repeated approvingly in the back
bald seventy-year-old magnates, uniformed and besashed almost all of
playing boston at the clubs. With an incessant hum of voices the crowd
the chairs, the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two
their brains to find some thought and hastened to utter it. The old
magnates, whom Pierre knew, sat and turned to look first at one and
then at another, and their faces for the most part only expressed
lengths--which found expression in the tones and looks more than in
his opinions, but felt himself in some way to blame and wished to
justify himself.
other voices.
One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attention
was immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the
table.
"Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!"
"He is the enemy of mankind!" cried another. "Allow me to speak...."
"Gentlemen, you are crushing me!..."
CHAPTER XXIII
At that moment Count Rostopchin with his protruding chin and alert
eyes, wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder,
entered the room, stepping briskly to the front of the crowd of
gentry.
"Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment," said
Rostopchin. "I am straight from the palace. Seeing the position we are
deigned to summon us and the merchants. Millions will pour forth
to supply men and not spare ourselves... That is the least we can do!"
A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the
table. The whole consultation passed more than quietly. After all
the preceding noise the sound of their old voices saying one after
on had even a mournful effect.
The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow
nobility and gentry, that they would furnish ten men, fully
equipped, out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolensk gentry had
arm in arm, to stretch their legs and converse in couples.
"The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cry resounded through the halls
and the whole throng hurried to the entrance.
The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two
lines of nobles. Every face expressed respectful, awe-struck
curiosity. Pierre stood rather far off and could not hear all that the
"Gentlemen!" said the Emperor with a quivering voice.
There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided, so
that Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor
has surpassed my expectations. I thank you in the name of the
rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides.
He stood at the back, and, though he had heard hardly anything,
From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the
merchants. There he remained about ten minutes. Pierre was among those
who saw him come out from the merchants' hall with tears of emotion in
his eyes. As became known later, he had scarcely begun to address
the merchants before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in
accompanied by two merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat
otkupshchik. The other was the mayor, a man with a thin sallow face
and the fat otkupshchik sobbed outright like a child and kept
repeating:
Pierre's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he
Having heard that Count Mamonov was furnishing a regiment, Bezukhov at
Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears,
name.
Next day the Emperor left Moscow. The assembled nobles all took
off their uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs,
CHAPTER I
to Dresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage he
received, could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to
the stimulating influence of a June morning, and could not refrain
from bursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.
Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be
personally insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the
great commander. Rostov charged the French because he could not
restrain his wish for a gallop across a level field; and in the same
reasoned, imagining that they knew what they were doing and did it
history, carrying on a work concealed from them but comprehensible
to us. Such is the inevitable fate of men of action, and the higher
they stand in the social hierarchy the less are they free.
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personal
Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personal
aims, to further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of
less any of those who did the actual fighting.
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear
its advance into the heart of Russia late in the season without any
given to the war by the burning of Russian towns and the hatred of the
foe this aroused among the Russian people. But no one at the time
of eight hundred thousand men--the best in the world and led by the
best general--could be destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half
its numerical strength, and led by inexperienced commanders as the
Russian army was. Not only did no one see this, but on the Russian
side every effort was made to hinder the only thing that could save
Russia, while on the French side, despite Napoleon's experience and
to Moscow at the end of the summer, that is, to doing the very thing
that was bound to lead to destruction.
saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he
sought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk,
and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the
telling us that from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian war
plan was adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, and
pointing to notes, projects, and letters which contain hints of such a
line of action. But all these hints at what happened, both from the
French side and the Russian, are advanced only because they fit in
with the event. Had that event not occurred these hints would have
been forgotten, as we have forgotten the thousands and millions of
hints and expectations to the contrary which were current then but
have now been forgotten because the event falsified them. There are
always so many conjectures as to the issue of any event that however
it may end there will always be people to say: "I said then that it
many were to quite the contrary effect.
Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the danger of extending
his line, and (on the Russian side) as to luring the enemy into the
depths of Russia, are evidently of that kind, and only by much
straining can historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and
are in flat contradiction to such conjectures. During the whole period
into Russia everything was done to stop them. And not only was
Napoleon not afraid to extend his line, but he welcomed every step
campaigns, but very lazily.
At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided, and our
sole aim was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage
farther. The Emperor reproached the commanders in chief for every step
they retired. He could not bear the idea of letting the enemy even
reach Smolensk, still less could he contemplate the burning of Moscow,
still more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating
into the depths of the country.
and missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August he
was at Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, though
of Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any
plan, for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most
took part in the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable,
campaign. We tried to unite them, with the evident intention of giving
them while avoiding battle with a much stronger enemy, and necessarily
Smolensk. But we withdrew at an acute angle not only because the
acute and we withdrew still farther, because Barclay de Tolly was an
unpopular foreigner disliked by Bagration (who would come his
postpone joining up and coming under Barclay's command as long as he
could. Bagration was slow in effecting the junction--though that was
the chief aim of all at headquarters--because, as he alleged, he
retire more to the left and more to the south, worrying the enemy from
command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferior
to his own.
and ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of
The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but
his energy to influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whole plan was
abandoned and the command entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not
this confusion, division, and the unpopularity of the foreign
commander in chief, there resulted on the one hand indecision and
the avoidance of a battle (which we could not have refrained from
had the armies been united and had someone else, instead of Barclay,
been in command) and on the other an ever-increasing indignation
indeed the only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was
necessary for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the
nation in general to a patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperor
to Moscow the strength of the Russian army was trebled.
He left in order not to obstruct the commander in chief's
undivided control of the army, and hoping that more decisive action
would then be taken, but the command of the armies became still more
confused and enfeebled. Bennigsen, the Tsarevich, and a swarm of
chief under observation and arouse his energy, and Barclay, feeling
less free than ever under the observation of all these "eyes of the
Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hinted at treachery and
others of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under
adjutants general to Petersburg and plunged into an open struggle with
At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagration
Bagration drove up in a carriage to to the house occupied by
Barclay. Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to
his senior officer Bagration.
reported direct to him. He wrote to Arakcheev, the Emperor's
confidant: "It must be as my sovereign pleases, but I cannot work with
Headquarters are so full of Germans that a Russian cannot exist and
sovereign and the Fatherland, but it turns out that I am serving
The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still
further embittered the relations between the commanders in chief,
and even less unity resulted. Preparations were made to fight the
corps commander, and, having spent the day with him, returned to
Barclay and condemned, as unsuitable from every point of view, the
battleground he had not seen.
While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field of
battle, and while we were looking for the French--having lost touch
with them--the French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and
reached the walls of Smolensk.
It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save
of the whole people. But Smolensk was burned by its own
inhabitants-who had been misled by their governor. And these ruined
result which caused his destruction.
CHAPTER II
Mary to come to his study.
"Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel with
hurts me, it hurts. I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well
then, gloat over it! Gloat over it!"
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He
old prince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admit
At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his
operations and the arrangement of the gardens and completely
and cold tone to his daughter seemed to say: "There, you see? You
plotted against me, you lied to Prince Andrew about my relations
with that Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him, but you see I need
neither her nor you!"
Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watching
his lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking to
Dessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with her
old nurse, or with "God's folk" who sometimes came by the back door to
see her.
feared for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at
not understand the significance of this war, which seemed to her
like all previous wars. She did not realize the significance of this
war, though Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed was
conception of it to her, and though the "God's folk" who came to see
her reported, in their own way, the rumors current among the people of
an invasion by Antichrist, and though Julie (now Princess
Drubetskaya), who had resumed correspondence with her, wrote patriotic
"I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Julie in her
and the same for their language which I cannot support to hear
"My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, but
his two sons and saying: 'I will perish with them but we will not be
shaken!' And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we, we
princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me, and we, unhappy
widows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our charpie,
only you, my friend, are missing..." and so on.
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance
recognize it, and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner.
The prince's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary
unhesitatingly believed him.
All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even
animated. He planned another garden and began a new building for the
him was that he slept very little and, instead of sleeping in his
Bourienne--a serf boy read to him. Then again he would spend a night
in the dining room.
On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his
first letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew had
dutifully asked his father's forgiveness for what he had allowed
himself to say and begged to be restored to his favor. To this
had kept the Frenchwoman at a distance. Prince Andrew's second letter,
written near Vitebsk after the French had occupied that town, gave a
brief account of the whole campaign, enclosed for them a plan he had
letter Prince Andrew pointed out to his father the danger of staying
at Bald Hills, so near the theater of war and on the army's direct
line of march, and advised him to move to Moscow.
At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mentioning that the French were
said to have already entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered his
son's letter.
"There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess
Mary--"Haven't you read it?"
"No, Father," she replied in a frightened voice.
"That must be very interesting," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew is
in a position to know..."
"Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"Go and get it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselle
Bourienne. "You know--under the paperweight on the little table."
Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly.
"No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You go, Michael Ivanovich."
Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he
had left the room the old prince, looking uneasily round, threw down
his napkin and went himself.
"They can't do anything... always make some muddle," he muttered.
old prince returned with quick steps, accompanied by Michael
him--not letting anyone read them at dinner.
On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess
Mary and, spreading out before him the plan of the new building and
had done so Princess Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He was
"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask.
taking his eyes from the plan of the building.
"Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the prince. "I have said and
get beyond the Niemen."
Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talking of
the Niemen when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess
Mary, forgetting the geographical position of the Niemen, thought that
what her father was saying was correct.
"When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polish swamps. Only they
could fail to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinking of the
campaign of 1807 which seemed to him so recent. "Bennigsen should have
advanced into Prussia sooner, then things would have taken a different
Vitebsk...."
"Ah, the letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes...
yes..." His face suddenly took on a morose expression. He paused.
"Yes, he writes that the French were beaten at... at... what river
Dessalles dropped his eyes.
"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself."
No one spoke for a long time.
"Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on,
raising his head and pointing to the plan of the building, "tell me
how you mean to alter it...."
Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixed
on her father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that
her father had forgotten his son's letter on the drawing-room table;
but she was not only afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the
about it.
Princess Mary for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forgotten in
"Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfully
ironic smile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worrying
very much about the new building. He has been reading a little, but
now"--Michael Ivanovich went on, lowering his voice--"now he's at
his desk, busy with his will, I expect." (One of the prince's favorite
occupations of late had been the preparation of some papers he meant
to leave at his death and which he called his "will.")
CHAPTER III
When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, the
sitting at his open bureau with screened candles, holding a paper in
his outstretched hand, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was reading
his manuscript--his "Remarks" as he termed it--which was to be
transmitted to the Emperor after his death.
long been waiting.
The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolensk and,
gave his instructions.
wax, as in Michael Ivanovich's list."
He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes.
"Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed."
Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to
be of a special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather
case had to be ordered to keep the "will" in.
The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours and still the
his eyes, and dozed off. Alpatych made a slight movement.
"Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I'll send after you."
it, fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at
to sleep, but he knew he would not be able to and that most depressing
the rooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that night.
thoughts he had had when lying there. It was unsatisfactory
everywhere, but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room was
better than other places: he had never slept there yet.
With the help of a footman Tikhon brought in the bedstead and
"That's not right! That's not right!" cried the prince, and
again.
"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thought the prince,
of his coat and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on
the bed, and appeared to be meditating as he looked contemptuously
at his withered yellow legs. He was not meditating, but only deferring
the bed. "Ugh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil might end and you
effort for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly had
he done so before he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwards
beneath him as if it were breathing heavily and jolting. This happened
to him almost every night. He opened his eyes as they were closing.
yes, there was something else important, very important, that I was
keeping till I should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them.
No, it was something, something in the drawing room. Princess Mary
talked some nonsense. Dessalles, that fool, said something.
Something in my pocket--can't remember..."
"Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?"
"About Prince Michael..."
something about Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."
He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table--on which
stood a glass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle--moved close to
the bed, and putting on his spectacles he began reading. Only now in
the stillness of the night, reading it by the faint light under the
"The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march they may be at Smolensk;
perhaps are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jumped up. "No, no, I don't
want anything!" he shouted.
He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes. And
vigorous and alert, entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and a
burning sense of jealousy of "the favorite" agitated him now as
strongly as it had done then. He recalled all the words spoken at that
first meeting with Potemkin. And he saw before him a plump, rather
over her coffin about his right to kiss her hand.
all the present! Quicker, quicker--and that they should leave me in
peace!"
CHAPTER IV
from Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.
The same evening that the prince gave his instructions to
Alpatych, Dessalles, having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that,
as the prince was not very well and was taking no steps to secure
his safety, though from Prince Andrew's letter it was evident that
to remain at Bald Hills might be dangerous, he respectfully advised
Smolensk, asking him to let her know the state of affairs and the
extent of the danger to which Bald Hills was exposed. Dessalles
wrote this letter to the Governor for Princess Mary, she signed it,
and it was given to Alpatych with instructions to hand it to the
Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hat-
a present from the prince--and carrying a stick as the prince did,
went out accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood ready
harnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood.
with ringing bells; but on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them.
His satellites--the senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery
maid, a cook, two old women, a little pageboy, the coachman, and
His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on
and behind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle,
and one of the coachmen helped him into the vehicle.
and speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the
head and crossed himself three times.
"If there is anything... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ's
started on his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye
of corn, scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there
were already being reaped, made his calculations as to the sowing
the prince's orders.
Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town
toward evening on the fourth of August.
the road. As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distant
sight of a splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and
which was being mown down by the soldiers, evidently for fodder.
he soon forgot it.
All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been
bounded by the will of the prince, and he never went beyond that
limit. Everything not connected with the execution of the prince's
orders did not interest and did not even exist for Alpatych.
On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he put
last thirty years. Some thirty years ago Ferapontov, by Alpatych's
advice, had bought a wood from the prince, had begun to trade, and now
a stout, dark, red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, a
a round belly.
before his shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych he
went up to him.
"You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leaving the town, but you
"Why are they leaving the town?" asked Alpatych.
"Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is: orders have
Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding. He asked for a samovar and for
All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next morning
business. It was a sunny morning and by eight o'clock it was already
hot. "A good day for harvesting," thought Alpatych.
From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning. At
musketry. Many people were hurrying through the streets and there were
many soldiers, but cabs were still driving about, tradesmen stood at
their shops, and service was being held in the churches as usual.
Alpatych went to the shops, to government offices, to the post office,
and to the Governor's. In the offices and shops and at the post office
everyone was talking about the army and about the enemy who was
done, and all were trying to calm one another.
In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found a large number of
people, Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's. At the
porch he met two of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew. This
"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're single. 'One
man though undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but with
thirteen in your family and all the property... They've brought us
to utter ruin! What sort of governors are they to do that? They
ought to be hanged--the brigands!..."
"What do I care? Let him hear! We're not dogs," said the
ex-captain of police, and looking round he noticed Alpatych.
"To see the Governor by his excellency's order," answered
bosom of his coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince....
"Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman. "They've
brought things to such a pass that there are no carts or
anything!... There it is again, do you hear?" said he, pointing
The door of the Governor's room opened and they all rose and moved
forward. An official ran out, said some words to a merchant, called
a stout official with a cross hanging on his neck to follow him, and
vanished again, evidently wishing to avoid the inquiring looks and
questions addressed to him. Alpatych moved forward and next time the
his buttoned coat, and handed him two letters.
turned to him and took the letters.
A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedly
said to him:
"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted on
the highest instructions--here..." and he handed a paper to
Alpatych. "Still, as the prince is unwell my advice is that they
should go to Moscow. I am just starting myself. Inform them..."
But the Governor did not finish: a dusty perspiring officer ran into
the room and began to say something in French. The Governor's face
expressed terror.
the officer.
Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpatych when
he came out of the Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now to the
firing, which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength,
Alpatych hurried to his inn. The paper handed to him by the Governor
said this:
"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightest
danger as yet and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with
any. I from the one side and Prince Bagration from the other are
marching to unite our forces before Smolensk, which junction will be
will defend our compatriots of the province entrusted to your care
or till the last warrior in our valiant ranks has perished. From
this you will see that you have a perfect right to reassure the
inhabitants of Smolensk, for those defended by two such brave armies
may feel assured of victory." (Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to
Baron Asch, the civil governor of Smolensk, 1812.)
People were anxiously roaming about the streets.
Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept
emerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets.
Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapontov's and women were
wailing and lamenting as they said good-by. A small watchdog ran round
was asleep. He woke him up, told him to harness, and went into the
passage. From the host's room came the sounds of a child crying, the
Ferapontov. The cook began running hither and thither in the passage
like a frightened hen, just as Alpatych entered.
"He's done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... dragged
"She kept begging to go away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says
'are all gone, so why,' she says, 'don't we go?' And he began
beating and pulling her about so!"
At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing to
hear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, where
he had left his purchases.
"You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a
baby in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through
the door at that moment and down the steps into the yard.
Ferapontov came out after her, but on seeing Alpatych adjusted his
waistcoat, smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into the
opposite room.
"Going already?" said he.
Alpatych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted his
packages and asked how much he owed.
"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" asked
Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anything
definite.
"With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov. "We'd
they're not Christians to ask it! Selivanov, now, did a good stroke
last Thursday--sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Will
their tea talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the good weather
for harvesting.
finishing his third cup of tea and getting up. "Ours must have got the
them into the river Marina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one
day."
had come in, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels,
hoofs, and bells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passed
It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in
shadow, the other half brightly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of
the window and went to the door. Suddenly the strange sound of a
far-off whistling and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon
bridge. From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of
cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town. But these sounds
were hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside
the meaning of this bombardment.
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused
curiosity. Ferapontov's wife, who till then had not ceased wailing
under the shed, became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the
The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With lively
eagerly.
splinters!"
"Routed up the earth like a pig," said another.
"That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed the first. "Lucky you
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had
was getting into his trap. The innkeeper stood at the gate.
"What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearing her master's voice she
turned back, pulling down her tucked-up skirt.
Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swooping
downwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of the
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different
sides, the frightened baby began to cry, and people crowded silently
"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My good
souls!..."
Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with her
thigh broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen.
Alpatych, his coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the house
porter were all sitting in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns,
the whistling of projectiles, and the piteous moaning of the cook,
which rose above the other sounds, did not cease for a moment. The
cellar asked in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband
her husband had gone with others to the cathedral, whence they were
fetching the wonder-working icon of Smolensk.
Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpatych left the cellar
and stopped in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear was
clouded with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon
footsteps, the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle of fires
which seemed widespread everywhere. The cook's moans had now subsided.
On two sides black curling clouds of smoke rose and spread from the
fires. Through the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or
ant-hill. Several of them ran into Ferapontov's yard before Alpatych's
eyes. Alpatych went out to the gate. A retreating regiment,
Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is being abandoned. Get
away, get away!" and then, turning to the soldiers, shouted:
Alpatych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told him
Alpatych and the coachman. The women, who had been silent till then,
in reply the same kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of
As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiers
in Ferapontov's open shop, talking loudly and filling their bags and
knapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontov
to shout at them, but suddenly stopped and, clutching at his hair,
"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils get it!" he cried,
taking some bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.
filling their bags. On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:
fire myself. We're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.
till it was possible to drive out.
out amid the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to the
Dnieper Alpatych's cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, which were
to stop. In a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had
stopped, a house and some shops were on fire. This fire was already
black smoke, now suddenly flared up again brightly, lighting up with
strange distinctness the faces of the people crowding at the
the incessant crackling of the flames talking and shouting could be
heard. Seeing that his trap would not be able to move on for some
it, and he saw two of them and a man in a frieze coat dragging burning
beams into another yard across the street, while others carried
bundles of hay.
wall had fallen in, the wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters
were alight. The crowd was evidently watching for the roof to fall in,
and Alpatych watched for it too.
"Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man.
recognizing the voice of his young prince.
looking at Alpatych from the back of the crowd.
"Your... your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs.
"Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master's
pale worn face. Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how
difficult it was to get away.
knee began writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to his
sister:
"Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by the
enemy within a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at
once when you will start. Send by special messenger to Usvyazh."
to arrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and the
boy's tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately. Before
he had had time to finish giving these instructions, a chief of
staff followed by a suite galloped up to him.
"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a German
accent, in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set on
fire in your presence and you stand by! What does this mean? You
will answer for it!" shouted Berg, who was now assistant to the
chief of staff of the commander of the left flank of the infantry of
the first army, a place, as Berg said, "very agreeable and well en
evidence."
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to
Alpatych.
"So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by
the tenth I don't receive news that they have all got away I shall
"Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spoke
collapsing roof of the barn, the burning grain in which diffused a
"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging... It's fine!"
"That's the owner himself," cried several voices.
"Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych, "report to them as
beside him, he touched his horse and rode down the side street.
From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the
enemy. On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was
marching along the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills.
fleecy clouds floated across the sky and occasionally veiled the
there any freshness. But on the road, the highroad along which the
troops marched, there was no such freshness even at night or when
sandy dust churned up more than six inches deep. As soon as day dawned
the march began. The artillery and baggage wagons moved noiselessly
the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft, choking, hot dust that
feet and wheels, while the rest rose and hung like a cloud over the
troops, settling in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and worst of all
in the lungs of the men and beasts as they moved along that road.
The higher the sun rose the higher rose that cloud of dust, and
through the screen of its hot fine particles one could look with naked
eye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the unclouded
sky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless
atmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of
that regiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving
abandonment made an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of anger
against the foe made him forget his own sorrow. He was entirely
devoted to the affairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind to
were proud of him and loved him. But he was kind and gentle only to
understand his past. As soon as he came across a former acquaintance
spiteful, ironical, and contemptuous. Everything that reminded him
former circle he confined himself to trying to do his duty and not
In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light to
sixth of August (he considered that it could and should have been
abandoning to pillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had built
and peopled. But despite this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrew
Two days previously he had received news that his father, son, and
sister had left for Moscow; and though there was nothing for him to do
at Bald Hills, Prince Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment
his own grief decided that he must ride there.
He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leaving his regiment on
the march, rode to his father's estate where he had been born and
spent his childhood. Riding past the pond where there used always to
be dozens of women chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it
half submerged, was floating on its side in the middle of the pond. He
the drive and the door stood open. Grass had already begun to grow
panes were broken, and of the trees in tubs some were overturned and
others dried up. He called for Taras the gardener, but no one replied.
Having gone round the corner of the hothouse to the ornamental garden,
plum trees had been torn off with the fruit. An old peasant whom
Prince Andrew in his childhood had often seen at the gate was
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sitting
strips of bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a
magnolia.
wandering in front of the house among the rosebushes. The shutters
were all closed, except at one window which was open. A little serf
his family away, was alone at Bald Hills and was sitting indoors
reading the Lives of the Saints. On hearing that Prince Andrew had
come, he went out with his spectacles on his nose, buttoning his coat,
and, hastily stepping up, without a word began weeping and kissing
Prince Andrew's knee.
by the troops and mown down while still green. The peasants were
Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:
"When did my father and sister leave?" meaning when did they leave
Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure for
Bogucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again
went into details concerning the estate management, asking for
"Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt for
"What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, looking down on
the old man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the
expression on his face that the old man himself understood how
untimely such questions were and only asked them to allay his grief.
night, dragoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of their
commanding officer, to hand in a complaint about it."
"Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemy
occupies the place?" asked Prince Andrew.
"He is my refuge! His will be done!" he exclaimed.
A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow
"You must go away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to go
to the Ryazan estate or to the one near Moscow."
Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and burst into sobs. Gently
disengaging himself, the prince spurred his horse and rode down the
avenue at a gallop.
The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a fly
impassive on the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last
on which he was making the bast shoe, and two little girls, running
out from the hot house carrying in their skirts plums they had plucked
master, the elder one frightened look clutched her younger companion
up some green plums they had dropped.
frightened little girl, was afraid of looking at her, and yet felt
an irresistible desire to do so. A new sensation of comfort and relief
came over him when, seeing these girls, he realized the existence of
other human interests entirely aloof from his own and just as
legitimate as those that occupied him. Evidently these girls
passionately desired one thing--to carry away and eat those green
plums without being caught--and Prince Andrew shared their wish for
the success of their enterprise. He could not resist looking at them
once more. Believing their danger past, they sprang from their
ambush and, chirruping something in their shrill little voices and
holding up their skirts, their bare little sunburned feet scampered
Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the
dusty highroad along which the troops were moving. But not far from
Bald Hills he again came out on the road and overtook his regiment
at its halting place by the dam of a small pond. It was past one
o'clock. The sun, a red ball through the dust, burned and scorched his
back intolerably through his black coat. The dust always hung
motionless above the buzz of talk that came from the resting troops.
There was no wind. As he crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the
ooze and freshness of the pond. He longed to get into that water,
however dirty it might be, and he glanced round at the pool from
pond had risen visibly more than a foot, flooding the dam, because
hands, necks, and faces, who were splashing about in it. All this
pathetic.
One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince
Andrew knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed
another, a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood
and snorted with satisfaction as he poured the water over his head
slapping one another, yelling, and puffing.
Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was
healthy, white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timokhin, with his red
little nose, standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel, felt
confused at seeing the prince, but made up his mind to address him
nevertheless.
"It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like to?" said he.
"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.
still undressed, ran off to clear the men out of the pond.
"What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and the men were in such
haste to clear out that the prince could hardly stop them. He
decided that he would rather wash himself with water in the barn.
naked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust
immense number of bodies splashing about in the dirty pond.
On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows from
his quarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:
knew that his letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore
weighed every word in it to the best of his ability.)
I expect the Minister [Barclay de Tolly] has already reported the
wantonly abandoned. I, for my part, begged him personally most
never before and might have lost half his army but could not have
before. With fifteen thousand men I held the enemy at bay for
fourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a stain on our army, and as for
losses were great, it is not true; perhaps about four thousand, not
more, and not even that; but even were they ten thousand, that's
war! But the enemy has lost masses...
would have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water
for men or horses. He gave me his word he would not retreat, but
There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that you
ashamed to wear the uniform. If it has come to this--we must fight
country.... I am really frantic with vexation; forgive my writing
boldly. It is clear that the man who advocates the conclusion of a
frankly: call out the militia. For the Minister is leading these
said to be more Napoleon's man than ours, and he is always advising
benefactor and sovereign, I submit. Only I am sorry for the Emperor
that he entrusts our fine army to such as he. Consider that on our
happened. Tell me, for God's sake, what will Russia, our mother
Russia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we abandoning
our good and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting feelings
of whom are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is
whole army bewails it and calls down curses upon him...
human life one may discriminate between those in which substance
life--we may allot Petersburg life, and especially the life of its
we had made peace and had again quarreled with Bonaparte and had
made constitutions and unmade them again, but the salons of Anna
Pavlovna Helene remained just as they had been--the one seven and
perplexity of Bonaparte's successes just as before and saw in them and
unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna
Pavlovna was the representative. And in Helene's salon, which
remarkably intelligent woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in
1812 as in 1808 of the "great nation" and the "great man," and
regretted our rupture with France, a rupture which, according to them,
Of late, since the Emperor's return from the army, there had been
demonstrations of hostility to one another, but each camp retained its
own tendency. In Anna Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen were
expressed to the effect that one ought not to go to the French theater
and that to maintain the French troupe was costing the government as
circulated. In the French circle of Helene and Rumyantsev the
reports of the cruelty of the enemy and of the war were contradicted
and all Napoleon's attempts at conciliation were discussed. In that
circle they discountenanced those who advised hurried preparations for
a removal to Kazan of the court and the girls' educational
circle the war in general was regarded as a series of formal
demonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the view
prevailed expressed by Bilibin--who now in Petersburg was quite at
settled. In that circle the Moscow enthusiasm--news of which had
reached Petersburg simultaneously with the Emperor's return--was
ridiculed sarcastically and very cleverly, though with much caution.
Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this
enthusiasm and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the
ancients. Prince Vasili, who still occupied his former important
"diplomatic salon," and often in his constant comings and goings
between the two camps became confused and said at Helene's what he
should have said at Anna Pavlovna's and vice versa.
Tolly, but was undecided as to who ought to be appointed commander
in chief. One of the visitors, usually spoken of as "a man of great
merit," having described how he had that day seen Kutuzov, the newly
chosen chief of the Petersburg militia, presiding over the
enrollment of recruits at the Treasury, cautiously ventured to suggest
Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done
Vasili interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them his
election as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor. They
did not listen to me.
his mistake at once. "Now, is it suitable that Count Kutuzov, the
nothing for his pains! How could they make a man commander in chief
who cannot mount a horse, who drops asleep at a council, and has the
very worst morals! A good reputation he made for himself at Bucharest!
I don't speak of his capacity as a general, but at a time like this
how they appoint a decrepit, blind old man, positively
blind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't see anything.
To play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"
No one replied to his remarks.
twenty-ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince. This
might indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasili's
opinion continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry
to express it. But on the eighth of August a committee, consisting
of Field Marshal Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, and
Kochubey met to consider the progress of the war. This committee
came to the conclusion that our failures were due to a want of unity
armies and over the whole region occupied by them.
On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's again met
educational establishments for young ladies. Prince Vasili entered the
room with the air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object
of his desires.
"Well, have you heard the great news? Prince Kutuzov is field
marshal! All dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At
last we have a man!" said he, glancing sternly and significantly round
at everyone in the drawing room.
director, could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his former
opinion. Though this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna
"But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, reminding Prince
Vasili of his own words.
"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly,
which he was wont to dispose of all difficulties.
"He sees well enough," he added. "And what I am so pleased about,"
he went on, "is that our sovereign has given him full powers over
all the armies and the whole region--powers no commander in chief ever
had before. He is a second autocrat," he concluded with a victorious
smile.
"God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.
The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles,
this question, observed:
"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those
"Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.
he, "for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before."
not allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.
Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasili said in a
whisper:
the Tsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said to
the Emperor?"
Kutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor
time!"
"They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did not yet
condition that the sovereign himself should not be with the army."
turned away from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at
CHAPTER VII
While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already
Napoleon's historian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying to
explanation of historic events in the will of one man; he is as
right as the Russian historians who maintain that Napoleon was drawn
to Moscow by the skill of the Russian commanders. Here besides the law
sincerely convinced that his loss resulted from a mistake he made
and looks for that mistake in the opening, but forgets that at each
stage of the game there were similar mistakes and that none of his
moves were perfect. He only notices the mistake to which he pays
attention, because his opponent took advantage of it. How much more
limits of time, and where it is not one will that manipulates lifeless
various wills!
After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma,
and then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owing to a
conjunction of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give
battle till they reached Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. From
Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacree
de pagodes chinoises,* this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination no
rest. On the march from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his light
to question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry. Followed by
gallop and reined in his horse with an amused expression.
*"Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the sacred
city of Alexander's people, Moscow with its innumerable churches
"Well?" asked Napoleon.
"One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps is joining up
with the main army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander in
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and
bring the man to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Several
had handed over to Rostov, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly's
jacket and on a French cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face.
"You are a Cossack?"
plain appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental
mind the presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the
incidents of the war," says Thiers, narrating this episode. In reality
Lavrushka, having got drunk the day before and left his master
dinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the village in quest of
chickens, where he engaged in looting till the French took him
prisoner. Lavrushka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who
of service to their master, and are keen at guessing their master's
but merely did his utmost to gain his new master's favor.
could no more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major's with
the rods, would have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant
up his eyes and considered.
In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type see
cunning in everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.
"It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon,
yours will win. That's right. But if three days pass, then after that,
well, then that same battle will not soon be over."
Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon
thus: "If a battle takes place within the next three days the French
will win, but if later, God knows what will happen." Napoleon did
not smile, though he was evidently in high good humor, and he
ordered these words to be repeated.
the world, but we are a different matter..."--without knowing why or
The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase,
Napoleon turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news
that he was talking to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor who
had written his immortally victorious name on the Pyramids, would
affect this enfant du Don.*
*"Child of the Don."
The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.
Lavrushka, understanding that this was done to perplex him and
that Napoleon expected him to be frightened, to gratify his new
masters promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his
eyes wide, and assumed the expression he usually put on when taken
to be whipped. "As soon as Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says
Thiers, "the Cossack, seized by amazement, did not utter another word,
but rode on, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached
him across the steppes of the East. All his loquacity was suddenly
Napoleon, after making the Cossack a present, had him set free like
imagination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" galloped
that he meant to relate to his comrades. What had really taken place
he did not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth
telling. He found the Cossacks, inquired for the regiment operating
ride round the neighboring villages with Ilyin; he let Lavrushka
have another horse and took him along with him.
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew
called up from the villages and armed, and wrote a letter to the
commander in chief's discretion to take measures or not for the
defense of Bald Hills, where one of Russia's oldest generals would
remain at Bald Hills.
But while himself remaining, he gave instructions for the
departure of the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to
father's feverish and sleepless activity after his previous apathy,
her life ventured to disobey him. She refused to go away and her
her she had worn him out, had caused his quarrel with his son, had
harbored nasty suspicions of him, making it the object of her life
to poison his existence, and he drove her from his study telling her
that if she did not go away it was all the same to him. He declared
that he did not wish to remember her existence and warned her not to
dare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, as she had
feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told her not to
the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and had
not gone away.
his full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief. His
caleche was already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the
to review his armed peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the window
several men came running up the avenue with frightened faces.
Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path,
moving toward her, and in their midst several men were supporting by
fell in small round spots through the shade of the lime-tree avenue,
was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one
helpless lips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make out
the very couch he had so feared of late.
The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and said
that the prince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side.
next day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanying
him.
By the time they reached Bogucharovo, Dessalles and the little
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the
new house Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the same
state, getting neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay
what was going on around him or not. One thing was certain--that he
was suffering and wished to say something. But what it was, no one
The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was
her something, and the fact that her presence always increased his
restlessness confirmed her opinion.
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally. There was
do to let him die on the road. "Would it not be better if the end
did come, the very end?" Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night and
wishing to find symptoms of the approach of the end.
there it was. And what seemed still more terrible to her was that
since her father's illness began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed
Thoughts that had not entered her mind for years--thoughts of a life
temptations of the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questions
continually recurred to her as to how she would order her life now,
it. She knew that the sole weapon against him was prayer, and she
tried to pray. She assumed an attitude of prayer, looked at the icons,
that a different world had now taken possession of her--the life of
a world of strenuous and free activity, quite opposed to the spiritual
world in which till now she had been confined and in which her
It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo. News of the
approach of the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten
miles from Bogucharovo, a homestead had been looted by French
marauders.
The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince; the
saying that the French were only some twenty-five miles away, that
French proclamations were circulating in the villages, and that if the
princess did not take her father away before the fifteenth, he could
not answer for the consequences.
The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth. The cares of
preparation and giving orders, for which everyone came to her,
prince lay. Several times, waking up, she heard his groans and
muttering, the creak of his bed, and the steps of Tikhon and the
door, and it seemed to her that his mutterings were louder than
usual and that they turned him over oftener. She could not sleep and
not deciding to do so. Though he did not speak, Princess Mary saw
and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was to
him. She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look
she sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in
But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of
losing him. She recalled all her life with him and in every word and
act of his found an expression of his love of her. Occasionally amid
these memories temptations of the devil would surge into her
imagination: thoughts of how things would be after his death, and
how her new, liberated life would be ordered. But she drove these
thoughts away with disgust. Toward morning he became quiet and she
She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with waking showed
hearing him groan, said to herself with a sigh that things were
still the same.
"But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!"
she cried with a feeling of loathing for herself.
She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch. In
front of it stood carriages without horses and things were being
packed into the vehicles.
still horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her
went out to her.
clearer. Come in, he is asking for you..."
pale and leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him,
overflowing with those dreadful, wicked temptations, was a torment
"Come," said the doctor.
Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. He
was lying on his back propped up high, and his small bony hands with
their knotted purple veins were lying on the quilt; his left eye gazed
She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her.
face he calmed down, not taking his eyes off her for some seconds.
Then his lips and tongue moved, sounds came, and he began to speak,
gazing timidly and imploringly at her, evidently afraid that she might
Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comic
difficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat. He said
something, repeating the same words several times. She could not
understand them, but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly
repeated the words he uttered.
It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor
sounds.
"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.
began pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to
find the right place for it.
"Always thoughts... about you... thoughts..." he then uttered much
more clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of being
understood.
"I have been calling you all night..." he brought out.
"If only I had known..." she said through her tears. "I was afraid
to come in."
"Weren't you asleep?"
Unconsciously imitating her father, she now tried to express herself
as he did, as much as possible by signs, and her tongue too seemed
to move with difficulty.
he had said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a
tender caressing word such as he had never used to her before. "Why
didn't you come in?"
"Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!...
from his eyes. "Call Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish,
timid expression of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.
He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless. So at least
it seemed to Princess Mary.
He glanced at her with timid surprise.
"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."
He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time. Then as if in
answer to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood
and remembered everything, he nodded his head and reopened his eyes.
destroyed her."
Princess Mary could no longer restrain herself and wept while she
Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes,
and Tikhon, understanding him, wiped away the tears.
Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them
repeated it. Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in
the mood in which he had just been speaking. She thought he was
"Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said.
trying to persuade her to prepare for her journey. When she had left
the room the prince again began speaking about his son, about the war,
and about the Emperor, angrily twitching his brows and raising his
hoarse voice, and then he had a second and final stroke.
Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot
and sunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel
thought she had never felt till that moment. She ran out sobbing
"Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to end
quicker.... I wished to be at peace.... And what will become of me?
What use will peace be when he is no longer here?" Princess Mary
again to the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne--who had remained
at Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave it--coming toward her with
a stranger. This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district,
who had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for
him; she led him to the house, offered him lunch, and sat down with
him. Then, excusing herself, she went to the door of the old
prince's room. The doctor came out with an agitated face and said
she could not enter.
"Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!"
her maid, who was evidently looking for her, and who stopped
suddenly as if in alarm on seeing her mistress.
voice.
"Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming!" replied the princess
hurriedly, not giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying, and
"Princess, it's God's will! You must be prepared for everything,"
said the Marshal, meeting her at the house door.
"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.
father's door. "Why are these people with frightened faces stopping
thought. She opened the door and the bright daylight in that
and other women. They all drew back from the bed, making way for
approached him, and repressing the terror that seized her, she pressed
and was replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay there before
her. "No, he is no more! He is not, but here where he was is something
unfamiliar and hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent
mystery!" And hiding her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into
together the legs that were already spreading apart. Then they dressed
body on a table. Heaven only knows who arranged all this and when, but
it all got done as if of its own accord. Toward night candles were
burning round his coffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor was
strewn with sprays of juniper, a printed band was tucked in under
his shriveled head, and in a corner of the room sat a chanter
reading the psalms.
Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so the
inmates of the house and strangers crowded into the drawing room round
with fixed and frightened eyes, crossing themselves, bowed and
CHAPTER IX
Until Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had always
been absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character
from those of Bald Hills. They differed from them in speech, dress,
and disposition. They were called steppe peasants. The old prince used
to approve of them for their endurance at work when they came to
Bald Hills to help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditches,
but he disliked them for their boorishness.
Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogucharovo, when he introduced
pay, had not softened their disposition but had on the contrary
boorishness. Various obscure rumors were always current among them: at
of some proclamation of the Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul
in 1797 (in connection with which it was rumored that freedom had been
granted them but the landowners had stopped it), then of Peter
Fedorovich's return to the throne in seven years' time, when
everything would be made free and so "simple" that there would be no
restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and his invasion were
connected in their minds with the same sort of vague notions of
Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."
In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large villages belonging to
the crown or to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work
where they pleased. There were very few resident landlords in the
in the life of the Russian people, the causes and meaning of which are
so baffling to contemporaries, were more clearly and strongly
to some unknown "warm rivers." Hundreds of peasants, among them the
Bogucharovo folk, suddenly began selling their cattle and moving in
whole families toward the southeast. As birds migrate to somewhere
beyond the sea, so these men with their wives and children streamed to
walked toward the "warm rivers." Many of them were punished, some sent
their own accord, and the movement died down of itself just as it
had sprung up, without apparent reason. But such undercurrents still
existed among the people and gathered new forces ready to manifest
themselves just as strangely, unexpectedly, and at the same time
simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone living in
close touch with these people it was apparent that these undercurrents
were acting strongly and nearing an eruption.
prince's death, noticed an agitation among the peasants, and that
contrary to what was happening in the Bald Hills district, where
over a radius of forty miles all the peasants were moving away and
leaving their villages to be devastated by the Cossacks, the
peasants in the steppe region round Bogucharovo were, it was
passed from hand to hand, and did not migrate. He learned from
domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant Karp, who possessed great
influence in the village commune and had recently been away driving
were destroying deserted villages, but that the French did not harm
them. Alpatych also knew that on the previous day another peasant
for anything taken from them. As proof of this the peasant had brought
from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know that
time to waste. On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death,
barely time to remove his own family and valuables from his estate.
For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village
Elder, Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."
tooth, as straight and strong at sixty as at thirty.
Bogucharovo, and had since filled that post irreproachably for
twenty-three years. The peasants feared him more than they did their
master. The masters, both the old prince and the young, and the
During the whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill,
least fatigue, and though he could not read he had never forgotten a
single money account or the number of quarters of flour in any of
the endless cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock of
the whole corn crop on any single acre of the Bogucharovo fields.
Alpatych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for
his Dron on the day of the prince's funeral and told him to have
twelve horses got ready for the princess' carriages and eighteen carts
for the things to be removed from Bogucharovo. Though the peasants
households at work in Bogucharovo and the peasants were well to do.
But on hearing the order Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent.
the carts.
Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting.
Alpatych named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no
horses available: some horses were carting for the government,
seemed that no horses could be had even for the carriages, much less
for the carting.
Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was a
model village Elder, so Alpatych had not managed the prince's
the highest degree the faculty of divining the needs and instincts
carried away. But he also knew that Dron, who had acquired property
and was hated by the commune, must be hesitating between the two
camps: the masters' and the serfs'. He noticed this hesitation in
Dron's look and therefore frowned and moved closer up to him.
"Now just listen, Dronushka," said he. "Don't talk nonsense to me.
His excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the
"I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.
"Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shaking his head.
"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.
his bosom and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet. "I can
see through you and three yards into the ground under you," he
continued, gazing at the floor in front of Dron.
Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at Alpatych and again
lowered his eyes.
"You drop this nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leave
morning for the princess' things. And don't go to any meeting
me, for Christ's sake!"
"Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see through you and three
his knowledge of the right time to sow the oats, and the fact that
he had been able to retain the old prince's favor for twenty years had
long since gained him the reputation of being a wizard, and that the
of wizards.
Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych interrupted
him.
"What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are you
thinking of, eh?"
"'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpatych. "Are they drinking?" he
asked abruptly.
"Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched another
them so, and that they must stop this and the carts must be got
"I understand."
suspicion that they can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive "I
not only doubted but felt almost certain that without the help of
held, which decided that the horses should be driven out into the
authorities.
CHAPTER X
After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room
and did not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpatych
mean to go away and begged to be left in peace.
The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward.
She lay on the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttons
suspected, but which had shown itself during her father's illness. She
wished to pray but did not dare to, dared not in her present state
position.
The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting
her thoughts suddenly stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed
her hair, got up, and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the
freshness of the clear but windy evening.
hinder you," she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let her
head fall on the window sill.
Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden
and kissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a
sighed, kissed her, and immediately began to cry. The princess
looked up at her. All their former disharmony and her own jealousy
recurred to her mind. But she remembered too how he had changed of
late toward Mademoiselle Bourienne and could not bear to see her,
desired his death, to condemn anyone?" she thought.
Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of
who yet was dependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorry
Mademoiselle Bourienne at once began crying again and kissed that
it. She said her only consolation was the fact that the princess
allowed her to share her sorrow, that all the old misunderstandings
should sink into nothing but this great grief; that she felt herself
affection and gratitude. The princess heard her, not heeding her words
"Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess," said Mademoiselle
Alpatych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?" she asked.
Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go
or where to. "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it
"You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we are
in danger--are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to move
knows..."
Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she
said. "Of course I would on no account wish to go away from him....
nothing, nothing, and don't want to...."
tomorrow, but I think it would now be better to stay here," said
terrible."
Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (not
printed on ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, telling people
"and and am sure that all due respect would be shown you."
stifled sobs.
"From whom did you get this?" she asked.
Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing.
Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window
and with a pale face went out of the room and into what had been
Prince Andrew's study.
"Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she
added, hearing Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We must go at once, at
once!" she said, appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of
"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French!
her, made her shudder, blush, and feel such a rush of anger and
vividly to her mind. "They, the French, would settle in this house: M.
Bourienne would do the honors of Bogucharovo for him. I should be
tell me of their victories over the Russians, and would pretend to
sympathize with my sorrow..." thought Princess Mary, not thinking
brother. For herself she did not care where she remained or what
happened to her, but she felt herself the representative of her dead
father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their
they would have done she felt bound to say and do. She went into
Prince Andrew's study, trying to enter completely into his ideas,
The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her
Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michael
Ivanovich and now for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and the
statement was correct. Alpatych was not at home, he had gone to the
police. Neither could the architect Michael Ivanovich, who on being
sent for came in with sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything. With
been accustomed to answer the old prince without expressing views of
could be got from his answers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken,
emaciated face that bore the stamp of inconsolable grief, replied:
"Yes, Princess" to all Princess Mary's questions and hardly
refrained from sobbing as he looked at her.
Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of
"Dronushka," she said, regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka who
always used to bring a special kind of gingerbread from his visit to
"We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.
"Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to
turn to. Is true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?"
"Why shouldn't you go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron.
I can do nothing. I understand nothing. I have nobody! I want to go
no horses; I told Yakov Alpatych so."
"It's all God's scourge," said Dron. "What horses we had have been
case of feeding horses--we may die of hunger ourselves! As it is, some
go three days without eating. We've nothing, we've been ruined."
"They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's not a case of carting."
"But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to help
To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when such
sorrow was filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor,
and the rich could refrain from helping the poor. She had heard
sometimes given to the peasants. She also knew that neither her father
nor her brother would refuse to help the peasants in need, she only
the grain she wished to give. She was glad such cares presented
She began asking Dron about the peasants' needs and what there was
in Bogucharovo that belonged to the landlord.
"But we have grain belonging to my brother?" she said.
prince did not order it to be sold."
"Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I give you
Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.
I give this order in my brother's name; and tell them that what is
ours is theirs. We do not grudge them anything. Tell them so."
taken from me," said he. "I have served twenty-three years and have
done no wrong. Discharge me, for God's sake!"
Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was
CHAPTER XI
An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come,
order and wished to have word with their mistress.
"But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary. "I only told
Dron to let them have the grain."
Yakov Alpatych returns let us get away... and please don't..."
"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.
say they don't agree to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered."
said Princess Mary. "Call Dronushka."
Dron came and confirmed Dunyasha's words; the peasants had come by
"But I never sent for them," declared the princess. "You must have
grain."
Dron only sighed in reply.
"If you order it they will go away," said he.
"No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite of
the nurse's and Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron,
remain here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of the
housing at our Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more in
my place," she thought as she went out in the twilight toward the
The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off their
came close up to them. So many different eyes, old and young, were
fixed on her, and there were so many different faces, that she could
all at once, did not know how to do it. But again the sense that she
represented her father and her brother gave her courage, and she
boldly began her speech.
"I am very glad you have come," she said without raising her eyes,
and I shall grudge nothing to help you. I am myself going away because
it is dangerous here... the enemy is near... because... I am giving
our grain, so that you may not suffer want! And if you have been
told that I am giving you the grain to keep you here--that is not
true. On the contrary, I ask you to go with all your belongings to our
The princess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd.
"I am not doing this on my own account," she continued, "I do it
in the name of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my
Again she paused. No one broke the silence.
"Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together. All that
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. She
apprehension and distrust--but the expression on all the faces was
identical.
"But why not?" asked the princess.
No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd,
"But why don't you want to take it?" she asked again.
No one answered.
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch
But as if this angered him, he bent his head quite low and muttered:
"Why should we agree? We don't want the grain."
We are sorry for you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself,
alone..." came from various sides of the crowd.
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical
expression, though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity
"We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We won't take your grain. We
eye in the crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all trying
houses and go into bondage! I dare say! 'I'll give you grain, indeed!'
she says," voices in the crowd were heard saying.
With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the
her departure next morning, she went to her room and remained alone
with her own thoughts.
CHAPTER XII
For a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window of
her room hearing the sound of the peasants' voices that reached her
from the village, but it was not of them she was thinking. She felt
about them. She thought only of one thing, her sorrow, which, after
the break caused by cares for the present, seemed already to belong to
began to rise, and stillness reigned over the village and the house.
Pictures of the near past--her father's illness and last moments-
rose one after another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she now
even in imagination at this still and mystic hour of night. And
She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and was
being dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills,
"Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died,"
she thought. "He had always thought what he said then." And she
home against his will. She had not slept and had stolen downstairs
that night had listened at the door. In a suffering and weary voice he
Princess Mary had thought and thought again now. "Now he will never
him or for me when he might have said all he longed to say, and not
Tikhon but I might have heard and understood him. Why didn't I enter
said the day he died. While talking to Tikhon he asked about me twice.
He wanted to see me, and I was standing close by, outside the door. It
was sad and painful for him to talk to Tikhon who did not understand
him. I remember how he began speaking to him about Lise as if she were
alive--he had forgotten she was dead--and Tikhon reminded him that she
behind the door I heard how he lay down on his bed groaning and loudly
exclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn't I go in then? What could he have
done to me? What could I have lost? And perhaps he would then have
been comforted and would have said that word to me." And Princess Mary
his death. "Dear-est!" she repeated, and began sobbing, with tears
face she had known ever since she could remember and had always seen
at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seen for the first
time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details, when she
"Dear-est!" she repeated again.
now?" This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answer
she saw him before her with the expression that was on his face as
And the horror that had seized her when she touched him and
convinced herself that that was not he, but something mysterious and
face, and she felt that the silence brooding over the house and within
"Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screamed wildly, and
tearing herself out of this silence she ran to the servants'
quarters to meet her old nurse and the maidservants who came running
toward her.
CHAPTER XIII
On the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by
and went for a ride--to try a new horse Ilyin had bought and to find
For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostile
it as for the French vanguard; Rostov, as a careful squadron
Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way to
Bogucharovo, a princely estate with a dwelling house and farm where
they hoped to find many domestic serfs and pretty girls, they
Rostov had no idea that the village he was entering was the property
of that very Bolkonski who had been engaged to his sister.
Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along the
incline before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin,
was the first to gallop into the village street.
"Yes, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov,
"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushka
mortify you."
They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants
was standing.
Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals
staggering, and singing some incoherent song, and approached the
"Fine fellows!" said Rostov laughing. "Is there any hay here?"
"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!" sang one of the peasants with a
"The French," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and here is Napoleon
"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again.
coming up.
"Very large," answered Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" he
added. "Is it a holiday?"
"The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune,"
replied the peasant, moving away.
At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women
and a man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.
"The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seeing
Dunyasha running resolutely toward him.
"She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winking.
"The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name."
"This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humble
servant."
"Co-o-om-pa-ny!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as
"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, but
with a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with
these people"--he pointed to the peasants--"asks you to come up to the
him as horseflies to a horse.
"Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" remarked Alpatych with a staid
"No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode
on a little way. "What's the matter?" he asked.
don't wish to let the mistress leave the estate, and threaten to
since morning, her excellency cannot get away."
"Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov.
"I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.
previous day, and her talk with Dron and at the meeting, had
actually had so bad an effect that Dron had finally given up the
for him; and that in the morning when the princess gave orders to
harness for her journey, the peasants had come in a large crowd to the
there was an order not to move, and that they would unharness the
chiefly Karp who did the talking, Dron not showing himself in the
order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they would serve her
cavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ran
"Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved
voices as Rostov passed through the anteroom.
sitting room, when Rostov was shown in. She could not grasp who he was
and why he had come, or what was happening to her. When she saw his
Russian face, and by his walk and the first words he uttered
her deep radiant look and began speaking in a voice that faltered
mercy of coarse, rioting peasants! And what a strange fate sent me
here! What gentleness and nobility there are in her features and
after her father's funeral, her voiced trembled. She turned away,
and then, as if fearing he might take her words as meant to move him
were tears in Rostov's eyes. Princess Mary noticed this and glanced
rising. "Go when you please, and I give you my word of honor that no
one shall dare to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act
blood, he moved toward the door.
Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would
consider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to
Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy.
"I am very, very grateful to you," she said in French, "but I hope
it was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it." She
"Excuse me!" she said.
Rostov, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.
CHAPTER XIV
But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw that
his hero and commander was following quite a different train of
himself.
Alpatych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up
with him with difficulty.
"Decision? What decision? Old dotard!..." cried he. "What have you
been about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can't manage them?
And as if afraid of wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych and
went rapidly forward. Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings,
views. He said the peasants were obdurate and that at the present
Rostov meaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the
Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with
good results. The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed
when they saw Rostov's rapid, firm steps and resolute, frowning face.
the princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among
the crowd. Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were
Dron was of this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp and
others attacked their ex-Elder.
money and take it away with you.... What does it matter to you whether
our homes are ruined or not?"
homes or take away a single grain, and that's all about it!" cried
another.
begrudged your lump of a son," a little old man suddenly began
attacking Dron--"and so they took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier!
But we all have to die."
"To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not against the commune,"
said Dron.
The two tall peasants had their say. As soon as Rostov, followed
by Ilyin, Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp,
thrusting his fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked to
closer together.
"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to the
"The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.
But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off
"Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where's
flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to
come off their heads.
"We don't riot, we're following the orders," declared Karp, and at
that moment several voices began speaking together.
"It's as the old men have decided--there's too many of you giving
"Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaningly
in a voice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bind
him!" he shouted, though there was no one to bind him but Lavrushka
and Alpatych.
Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from
taking off their belts.
"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.
"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if that
order, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.
And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took off his
to your houses at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!"
"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness.
It's all nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voices
were heard bickering with one another.
"There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, coming into his own again.
crowd began at once to disperse through the village.
The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The two
drunken peasants followed them.
"Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp.
Bogucharovo house. The peasants were briskly carrying out the
proprietor's goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron,
liberated at Princess Mary's wish from the cupboard where he had
"Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a man
with a round smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. "You know
it has cost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under
the cord where it'll get rubbed? I don't like that way of doing
things. Let it all be done properly, according to rule. Look here, put
it under the bast matting and cover it with hay--that's the way!"
"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Prince
"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall,
round-faced peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the
When her carriage drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied
her eight miles from Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by our
troops. At the inn at Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, for
the first time permitting himself to kiss her hand.
"How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary's
occurred. "Any police officer would have done as much! If we had had
said he with a sense of shame and wishing to change the subject. "I am
only happy to have had the opportunity of making your acquaintance.
Good-by, Princess. I wish you happiness and consolation and hope to
me blush, please don't thank me!"
But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thanked
him with the whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude
and tenderness. She could not believe that there was nothing to
thank him for. On the contrary, it seemed to her certain that had he
not been there she would have perished at the hands of the mutineers
and of the French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible and
sorrow. His kind, honest eyes, with the tears rising in them when
she herself had begun to cry as she spoke of her loss, did leave her
memory.
When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt
her eyes filling with tears, and then not for the first time the
On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess' position
more than once noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window
Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen
herself with the thought that no one would ever know it and that she
would not be to blame if, without ever speaking of it to anyone, she
continued to the end of her life to love the man with whom she had
Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his
words, happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at those
moments that Dunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the
"Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo, and at that very
moment?" thought Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister to
Providence.
grew angry. It made him angry just because the idea of marrying the
able to put his father's affairs in order, and would even--he felt it-
But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostov grew angry
On receiving command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Prince
Andrew and sent an order for him to report at headquarters.
Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and at
the bench at the gate awaiting his Serene Highness, as everyone now
regimental music and now the roar of many voices shouting "Hurrah!" to
the new commander in chief. Two orderlies, a courier and a major-domo,
stood near by, some ten paces from Prince Andrew, availing
themselves of Kutuzov's absence and of the fine weather. A short,
swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick mustaches and
whether he would soon be back.
commander in chief's orderly speaks to officers, replied:
"What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll be here soon. What do you
want?"
approached Bolkonski with a slight bow. Bolkonski made room for him on
the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.
"You're also waiting for the commander in chief?" said he. "They say
p'waps Wussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows what
was happening. We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part in
"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of taking
to mention the estate and home of my birth--my father, who died of
grief. I belong to the province of Smolensk."
"Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance!
Denisov, pressing Prince Andrew's hand and looking into his face
with a particularly kindly attention. "Yes, I heard," said he
sympathetically, and after a short pause added: "Yes, it's Scythian
pleased, Pwince, to make your acquaintance!" he repeated again,
smiling sadly, and he again pressed Prince Andrew's hand.
first suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to
to Bald Hills, and the recent news of his father's death--and had
experienced so many emotions, that for a long time past those memories
him with nearly their former strength. For Denisov, too, the
romantic past, when after supper and after Natasha's singing he had
proposed to a little girl of fifteen without realizing what he was
doing. He smiled at the recollection of that time and of his love
passionately and exclusively. This was a plan of campaign he had
devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat. He had
proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it to
operation was too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or
concurrently with, action on the front to bar the advance of the
French, we should attack their line of communication. He began
explaining his plan to Prince Andrew.
"They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake to
that's certain! There's only one way--guewilla warfare!"
Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to
Bolkonski. In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from
the army, growing more incoherent and more diffused, mingling with
music and songs and coming from the field where the review was held.
Sounds of hoofs and shouts were nearing the village.
(a guard of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming down
a crowd of officers ran after and around them shouting, "Hurrah!"
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov was
red band and no peak, nodding his head continually. When he came up to
silently and attentively for nearly a minute with the steady gaze of a
"And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, good-by,
General," he added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and
"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still more
the familiar weariness of his expression were still the same. He was
wearing the white Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a
whip hanging over his shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and
yard. His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man
who means to rest after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the
on his knee, groaned, and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks
He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes,
whistled, and again glanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old
men, it was only after some seconds that the impression produced by
Prince Andrew's face linked itself up with Kutuzov's remembrance of
porch which creaked under his weight.
He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.
"And how's your father?"
Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then
took off his cap and crossed himself:
"May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God's will be done to us all!" He
loved him and respected him, and sympathize with you with all my
heart."
some time did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew saw
eyes. He sighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise
"Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.
despite the angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him.
to his Serene Highness a matter of great importance for their
country's welfare. Kutuzov looked wearily at him and, lifting his
hands with a gesture of annoyance, folded them across his stomach,
Speak!" Denisov blushed like a girl (it was strange to see the color
Smolensk and Vyazma. Denisov came from those parts and knew the
country well. His plan seemed decidedly a good one, especially from
the strength of conviction with which he spoke. Kutuzov looked down at
as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge from it. And from
that hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with a portfolio under
his arm really did appear.
"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "are
Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man to
deal with it all?" and again listened to Denisov.
Denisov?" asked Kutuzov, interrupting him.
"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All right, all
papers Konovnitsyn had brought him.
general on duty in a discontented voice, "the plans must be examined
room till he was disengaged. He made a grimace...
look at them here," said he. "Don't go away," he added, turning to
While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a
woman's voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door.
Several times on glancing that way he noticed behind that door a
on her head, holding a dish and evidently awaiting the entrance of the
that this was the wife of the priest whose home it was, and that she
welcomed his Serene Highness with the cross at the church, and she
the adjutant with a smile. At those words Kutuzov looked round. He was
at the Austerlitz council of war. He evidently listened only because
he had ears which, though there was a piece of tow in one of them,
could not help hearing; but it was evident that nothing the general
could say would surprise or even interest him, that he knew all that
as one has to listen to the chanting of a service of prayer. All
was saying was even more clever and to the point, but it was evident
that Kutuzov despised knowledge and cleverness, and knew of
something else that would decide the matter--something independent
of cleverness and knowledge. Prince Andrew watched the commander
feminine whispering behind the door, and a desire to observe
propriety. It was evident that Kutuzov despised cleverness and
learning and even the patriotic feeling shown by Denisov, but despised
them not because of his own intellect, feelings, or knowledge--he
did not try to display any of these--but because of something else. He
despised them because of his old age and experience of life. The
only instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that report
the general put before him for signature a paper relating to the
recovery of payment from army commanders for green oats mown down by
the soldiers, when landowners lodged petitions for compensation.
After hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together and
shook his head.
"Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all,
them cut the crops and burn wood to their hearts' content. I don't
order it or allow it, but I don't exact compensation either. One can't
get on without it. 'When wood is chopped the chips will fly.'" He
looked at the paper again. "Oh, this German precision!" he muttered,
shaking his head.
CHAPTER XVI
"Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he signed the last of the
documents, and rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fat
The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had
after all not managed to present at the right moment, though she had
He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, and
"Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"
dish for her. "Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked,
moving to the door of the room assigned to him. The priest's wife
smiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the
lunch with him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to
Kutuzov. He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the same
unbuttoned overcoat. He had in his hand a French book which he
closed as Prince Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife.
by Madame de Genlis.
"Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a talk," said Kutuzov.
"It's sad, very sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a
father to you, a second father...."
Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, and
"What... what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in an
agitated voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince
this agitating conversation, and added: "I sent for you to keep you
with me."
"I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no longer fit for the
Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him.
regiment, am fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I
with you, believe me..."
advisers served there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... I
Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek
to be kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man's
eyes. Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily,
wish to show sympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz
was both pleasant and flattering to him.
send." And changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkish
blamed," he said, "both for that war and the peace... but everything
came at the right time. Tout vient a point a celui qui sait attendre.*
returning to the subject of "advisers" which evidently occupied him.
"Ah, those advisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all we
should not have made peace with Turkey and should not have been
fortresses with thirty thousand men. It is not difficult to capture
a fortress but it is difficult to win a campaign. For that, storming
and attacking but patience and time are wanted. Kamenski sent soldiers
to Rustchuk, but I only employed these two things and took more
growing warmer and beating his chest, "I'll make them eat horseflesh!"
"But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew.
believe me, my dear boy, there is nothing stronger than those two:
patience and time, they will do it all. But the advisers n'entendent
pas de cette oreille, voila le mal.* Some want a thing--others
"Well, what do you want us to do?" he repeated and his eye shone
with a deep, shrewd look. "I'll tell you what to do," he continued, as
articulated the French proverb deliberately.
*"Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."
*[2] "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing."
"Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I
share your sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor
a prince, nor a commander in chief, but a father! If you want anything
unfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but
whom it had been entrusted. The more he realized the absence of all
personal motive in that old man--in whom there seemed to remain only
the habit of passions, and in place of an intellect (grouping events
and drawing conclusions) only the capacity calmly to contemplate the
course of events--the more reassured he was that everything would be
devise or undertake anything," thought Prince Andrew, "but he will
He will not hinder anything useful nor allow anything harmful. He
from meddling and renounce his personal wish directed to something
else. And above all," thought Prince Andrew, "one believes in him
because he's Russian, despite the novel by Genlis and the French
proverbs, and because his voice shook when he said: 'What they have
brought us to!' and had a sob in it when he said he would 'make them
eat horseflesh!'"
and general approval were founded with which, despite court
influences, the popular choice of Kutuzov as commander in chief was
CHAPTER XVII
After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual
course, and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to
English Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice
everyone had displayed during the Emperor's stay was the call for
promises had been made assumed a legal, official form and became
unavoidable.
With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of their
situation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even
more frivolous, as always happens with people who see a great danger
that speak with equal power in the human soul: one very reasonably
tells a man to consider the nature of the danger and the means of
escaping it; the other, still more reasonably, says that it is too
depressing and painful to think of the danger, since it is not in
man's power to foresee everything and avert the general course of
events, and it is therefore better to disregard what is painful till
it was now with the inhabitants of Moscow. It was long since people
the sign of the eagle, began to address the assembled people," were
read and discussed, together with the latest of Vasili Lvovich
Pushkin's bouts rimes.
In the corner room at the Club, members gathered to read these
saying: "They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our
buckwheat porridge, and choke themselves with cabbage soup. They are
all dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with a
hayfork." Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and
vulgar. It was said that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen and
were deported to Nizhni by boat, and Rostopchin had said to them in
French: "Rentrez en vousmemes; entrez dans la barque, et n'en faites
pas une barque de Charon."* There was talk of all the government
Shinshin's witticism was added--that for that alone Moscow ought to be
grateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamonov's regiment would cost
him eight hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhov had spent even
that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the head of his
regiment without charging anything for the show.
*"Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to make it a
"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected
fingers.
"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured. What
"A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie
In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been
agreed that they would speak nothing but Russian and that those who
made a slip and spoke French should pay fines to the Committee of
Voluntary Contributions.
present. "'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!"
"You spare no one," continued Julie to the young man without heeding
the author's remark.
"For caustique--I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay
won't be responsible," she remarked, turning to the author: "I have
master to teach me Russian!"
"Ah, here he is!" she added. "Quand on... No, no," she said to the
militia officer, "you won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see its
rays!" and she smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just talking of
woman. "We were saying that your regiment would be sure to be better
than Mamonov's."
"Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," replied Pierre, kissing his
hostess' hand and taking a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it."
a sly, sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.
face expressed perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean. In
should make too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid I
should hardly be able to climb onto a horse."
Among those whom Julie's guests happened to choose to gossip about
were the Rostovs.
"I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way," said Julie.
drags on and on. He asks too much."
"No, I think the sale will come off in a few days," said someone.
"Though it is madness to buy anything in Moscow now."
"Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in danger?"
"I? What a question! I am going because... well, because everyone is
going: and besides--I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon."
"Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen."
all his debts," said the militia officer, speaking of Rostov.
"A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so
long in Moscow? They meant to leave for the country long ago.
knowing smile.
"They are waiting for their younger son," Pierre replied. "He joined
Obolenski's Cossacks and went to Belaya Tserkov where the regiment
is being formed. But now they have had him transferred to my
long ago, but the countess won't on any account leave Moscow till
her son returns."
"I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalie
has recovered her looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easily
some people get over everything!"
"You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame de
"What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing.
"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous
*"It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!"
"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer.
"All right, one can't talk--how tiresome!"
"What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked angrily, rising
"Come now, Count, you know!"
"I don't know anything about it," said Pierre.
"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always
more friendly with Vera--that dear Vera."
"No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have not
taken on myself the role of Natalie Rostova's knight at all, and
have not been their house for nearly a month. But I cannot
understand the cruelty..."
triumphantly, and to have the last word she promptly changed the
arrived in Moscow yesterday. Do you know that she has lost her
father?"
"She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is
quite a romance. Nicholas Rostov! She was surrounded, and they
and saved her...."
"Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du
jeune homme."*
"Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!"
CHAPTER XVIII
When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin's
broadsheets that had been brought that day.
The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had
will be less panic and less gossip," ran the broadsheet "but I will
showed Pierre clearly for the first time that the French would enter
Moscow. The second broadsheet stated that our headquarters were at
many of the inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed, weapons were
broadsheets. Evidently the terrible stormcloud he had desired with the
whole strength of his soul but which yet aroused involuntary horror in
him was drawing near.
himself for the hundredth time. He took a pack of cards that lay on
cards, holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comes
out, it means... what does it mean?"
"Then it will mean that I must go to the army," said Pierre to
himself. "Come in, come in!" he added to the princess.
Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and long
waist, was still living in Pierre's house. The two younger ones had
both married.
agitated voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is going
to happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How is
"On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierre
in the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feeling
uncomfortable in the role of her benefactor.
"Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivanovna told me
above all, the French will be here any day now, so what are we waiting
me to be taken to Petersburg. Whatever I may be, I can't live under
Bonaparte's rule."
"Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get your information from? On
you don't want to do this..."
"But I will, I'll give the order at once."
with. Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.
"But you have been misinformed," said Pierre. "Everything is quiet
reading..." He showed her the broadsheet. "Count Rostopchin writes
that he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter
a hypocrite, a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot.
Didn't he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever
it might be, should be dragged to the lockup by his hair'? (How
mob near killed her because she said something in French."
"Oh, but it's so... You take everything so to heart," said Pierre,
and began laying out his cards for patience.
Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army,
something terrible.
Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's head
of his regiment could not be found without selling one of the estates.
In general the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of
able to repress a smile.
"Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done? I can't draw back
now!"
The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the
better was Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that the
catastrophe he expected was approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was
left in town. Julie had gone, and so had Princess Mary. Of his
them.
Vorontsovo to see the great balloon Leppich was constructing to
destroy the foe, and a trial balloon that was to go up next day. The
constructed by the Emperor's desire. The Emperor had written to
As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable and
intelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov to
the first time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the
enemy's hands. It is essential for him to combine his movements with
those of the commander in chief.
On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoe
got out of his trap. A French cook accused of being a spy was being
releasing from the flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers, in
resembling that on the thin Frenchman's face, Pierre pushed his way in
through the crowd.
"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept asking.
But the attention of the crowd--officials, burghers, shopkeepers,
stout man rose, frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently
about him, but suddenly his lips trembled and he began to cry, in
the way full-blooded grown-up men cry, though angry with himself for
feelings of pity as it seemed to Pierre.
his teeth on edge!" said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind
appreciated. Some people began to laugh, others continued to watch
so audibly that the coachman asked him:
"What is your pleasure?"
Lubyanka Street.
"Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing his coachman--a thing he
rarely did. "Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I must
At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the
Lobnoe Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he
could no longer remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that
this or that the man ought to have known it for himself.
On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey--his head coachman
who knew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow-
that he would leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk, and that
his saddle horses should be sent there. This could not all be arranged
that day, so on Evstafey's representation Pierre had to put off his
departure till next day to allow time for the relay horses to be
sent on in advance.
and after dinner Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that night
in Perkhushkovo, he learned that there had been a great battle that
evening. (This was the battle of Shevardino.) He was told that there
in Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firing, but nobody could
approaching Mozhaysk.
room to be had. It was full of officers.
the march. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, and
the farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into
and a new and joyful feeling he had not experienced before. It was a
Emperor's visit--a sense of the necessity of undertaking something and
sacrificing something. He now experienced a glad consciousness that
wealth, even life itself--is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away,
not try to determine for whom and for what he felt such particular
delight in sacrificing everything. He was not occupied with the
CHAPTER XIX
On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardino
Redoubt was fought, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either
place.
Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and
accepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not the
result for the Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brought
nearer to the destruction of Moscow--which we feared more than
army--which they feared more than anything in the world. What the
result must be was quite obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov
If the commanders had been guided by reason, it would seem that it
been equally clear to Kutuzov that by accepting battle and risking the
loss of a quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. For
draughts I have one man less and go on exchanging, I shall certainly
sixteen men and I have fourteen, I am only one eighth weaker than
as strong as I am.
Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the
thousand against a hundred thousand. Yet the shrewd and experienced
Kutuzov accepted the battle, while Napoleon, who was said to be a
lengthening his lines of communication still more. If it is said
ended a previous campaign by occupying Vienna, there is much
that from Smolensk onwards he wished to stop, knew the danger of his
extended position, and knew that the occupation of Moscow would not be
the end of the campaign, for he had seen at Smolensk the state in
reply to his repeated announcements of his wish to negotiate.
involuntarily and irrationally. But later on, to fit what had
foresight and genius the generals who, of all the blind tools of
The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes
furnish the whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to
accustom ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that
preceding battle of Shevardino were fought, there also exists a
definite and well-known, but quite false, conception. All the
historians describe the affair as follows:
The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk sought
out for itself the best position for a general engagement and found
such a position at Borodino.
The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the
left of the highroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a right
battle was fought.
In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set
we are told, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on
So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who cares
to look into the matter can easily convince himself.
The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the
Borodino. They did not stop at any one of these positions because
Kutuzov did not wish to occupy a position he had not himself chosen,
because the popular demand for a battle had not yet expressed itself
positions they had passed were stronger, and that the position at
Borodino (the one where the battle was fought), far from being strong,
was no more a position than any other spot one might find in the
Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of
Borodino to the left of, and at a right angle to, the highroad (that
twenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they think that a battle might be
entrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on the
twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by the
in front of the position where the battle was accepted. Why was it
more strongly fortified than any other post? And why were all
efforts exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till
late at night on the twenty-fourth? A Cossack patrol would have
sufficed to observe the enemy. Thirdly, as proof that the position
on which the battle was fought had not been foreseen and that the
have the fact that up to the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and
Bagration were convinced that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left
flank of the position, and that Kutuzov himself in his report, written
battle of Borodino were written at leisure, that the incorrect and
extraordinary statement was invented (probably to justify the mistakes
of a commander in chief who had to be represented as infallible)
that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post--whereas in reality
of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position previously
selected, where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot which
The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the river
acute angle--so that the left flank was at Shevardino, the right flank
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how
the battle was actually fought, this position, protected by the
Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as
the history books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsa
to Borodino (he could not have seen that position because it did not
exist), nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army, but while
pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the
Russian position--at the Shevardino Redoubt--and unexpectedly for
the Russians moved his army across the Kolocha. And the Russians,
not having time to begin a general engagement, withdrew their left
wing from the position they had intended to occupy and took up a new
Napoleon shifted the whole forthcoming battle from right to left
(looking from the Russian side) and transferred it to the plain
advantageous as a position than any other plain in Russia--and there
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to
the Kolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the
redoubt but had begun the attack next morning, no one would have
doubted that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our and
the battle would have taken place where we expected it. In that case
center or on the right, and the engagement would have taken place on
Gridneva), and as the Russian commanders did not wish, or were not
in time, to begin a general engagement then on the evening of the
twenty-fourth, the first and chief action of the battle of Borodino
was already lost on the twenty-fourth, and obviously led to the loss
the morning of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank,
chanced to be.
weak, unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantage of that
having fully realized what had happened, namely the loss of our
position on the left flank and the shifting of the whole field of
position from the village of Novoe to Utitsa, and consequently had
happened that throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed the
many men. (Poniatowski's action against Utitsa, and Uvarov's on the
right flank against the French, were actions distinct from the main
has been described. The battle of Borodino was not fought on a
chosen and entrenched position with forces only slightly weaker than
those of the enemy, but, as a result of the loss of the Shevardino
unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive result,
but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete disintegration
and flight.
CHAPTER XX
being held and the bells were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehicle
and proceeded on foot. Behind him a cavalry regiment was coming down
of carts carrying men who had been wounded in the engagement the day
crossing from side to side. The carts, in each of which three or
four wounded soldiers were lying or sitting, jolted over the stones
that had been thrown on the steep incline to make it something like
compressed lips, and knitted brows, held on to the sides of the
carts as they were jolted against one another. Almost all of them
Pierre's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep
to one side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the
hill with its singers, surrounded Pierre's carriage and blocked the
road. Pierre stopped, being pressed against the side of the cutting in
which the road ran. The sunshine from behind the hill did not
penetrate into the cutting and there it was cold and damp, but above
Pierre's head was the bright August sunshine and the bells sounded
merrily. One of the carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road
close to Pierre. The driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it,
placed a stone under one of its tireless hind wheels, and began
arranging the breech-band on his little horse.
following the cart on foot, caught hold of it with his sound hand
and turned to look at Pierre.
"I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us
He was looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy
the cart had probably been wounded in the cheek. His whole head was
wrapped in rags and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby's
looking at the cathedral and crossing himself. Another, a young lad, a
passing close by:
   Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,
   Living in a foreign land.
of the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet another
near the panting little nag where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber,
and sad.
The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry
singers.
"Oh, the coxcombs!" he muttered reproachfully.
"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too....
The peasants--even they have to go," said the soldier behind the cart,
addressing Pierre with a sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays....
They want the whole nation to fall on them--in a word, it's Moscow!
They want to make an end of it."
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre understood
The road was clear again; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.
He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces, but
eagerly addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He was
surgeon, and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied
the driver's seat to pull up.
"Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.
"Well, you know, I wanted to see..."
Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention of
taking part in a battle.
"Why should you be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?"
he said, exchanging glances with his young companion. "Anyhow his
Serene Highness knows you and will receive you graciously. That's what
The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry.
"You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is
hillock and you'll see."
"Can one see from there?... If you would..."
doctors enough for six thousand. We have ten thousand carts, but we
need other things as well--we must manage as best we can!"
had stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he had
amazed Pierre.
death?" And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the
Mozhaysk hill, the carts with the wounded, the ringing bells, the
slanting rays of the sun, and the songs of the cavalrymen vividly
recurred to his mind.
"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a
moment think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded.
Tatarinova.
commander in chief was putting up there, but just when Pierre
arrived he was not in and hardly any of the staff were there--they had
gone to the church service. Pierre drove on toward Gorki.
When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street,
he saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and
with crosses on their caps, who, talking and laughing loudly, animated
and perspiring, were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to
the right of the road.
Some of them were digging, others were wheeling barrowloads of earth
along planks, while others stood about doing nothing.
seeing these peasants, who were evidently still amused by the
novelty of their position as soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the
wounded men at Mozhaysk and understood what the soldier had meant when
these bearded peasants at work on the battlefield, with their queer,
left toward the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned
collarbones, impressed Pierre more strongly with the solemnity and
importance of the moment than anything he had yet seen or heard.
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toiling
militiamen, ascended the knoll from which, according to the doctor,
the battlefield could be seen.
It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone somewhat to the left
and behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising
like an amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied
atmosphere.
From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the
Smolensk highroad, passing through a village with a white church
some five hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it. This was
stationed. Beyond Valuevo the road disappeared into a yellowing forest
the right of the road, the cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery
gleamed in the sun. Here and there over the whole of that blue
campfires could be seen and indefinite masses of troops--ours and
the enemy's. The ground to the right--along the course of the
the smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down, could be
seen.
All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor
the right side of the field fully satisfied his expectations.
fields, meadows, troops, woods, the smoke of campfires, villages,
mounds, and streams; and try as he would he could descry no military
"position" in this place which teemed with life, nor could he even
distinguish our troops from the enemy's.
"I must ask someone who knows," he thought, and addressed an officer
who was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure.
"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?"
"Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion.
to Pierre.
"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.
"Where? Where?" asked Pierre.
"One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!"
"Ah, those are the French! And over there?..." Pierre pointed to a
distance with a big tree on it, near a village that lay in a hollow
"That's his again," said the officer. (It was the Shevardino
Redoubt.) "It was ours yesterday, but now it is his."
"Our position?" replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "I
white church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha. You see down
bridge. That's our center. Our right flank is over there"--he
pointed sharply to the right, far away in the broken ground--"That's
where the Moskva River is, and we have thrown up three redoubts there,
very strong ones. The left flank..." here the officer paused. "Well,
you see, that's difficult to explain.... Yesterday our left flank
was there at Shevardino, you see, where the oak is, but now we have
and the smoke? That's Semenovsk, yes, there," he pointed to
moved his troops there is only a ruse; he will probably pass round
to the right of the Moskva. But wherever it may be, many a man will be
An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was
giving these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish
speaking, but at this point, evidently not liking the officer's
"Gabions must be sent for," said he sternly.
The officer appeared abashed, as though he understood that one might
"Well, send number three company again," the officer replied
hurriedly.
"No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, and he went down the
"Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him,
holding his nose as he ran past the men at work.
officers, soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the
road.
arms reversed. From behind them came the sound of church singing.
procession.
The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those who
had been at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to
meet the church procession. Following the battalion that marched along
This was the icon that had been brought from and had since accompanied
the army. Behind, before, and on both sides, crowds of militiamen with
bared heads walked, ran, and bowed to the ground.
had been holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved
by others, the chanters relit their censers, and service began. The
hot rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind
played with the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons
decorating the icon. The singing did not sound loud under the open
sky. An immense crowd of bareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamen
surrounded the icon. Behind the priest and a chanter stood the
notabilities on a spot reserved for them. A bald general with
general with a St. George's Cross on his neck stood just behind the
priest's back, and without crossing himself (he was evidently a
German) patiently awaited the end of the service, which he
considered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse the
patriotism of the Russian people. Another general stood in a martial
pose, crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest while
recognized several acquaintances among these notables, but did not
look at them--his whole attention was absorbed in watching the serious
lazily and mechanically to sing: "Save from calamity Thy servants, O
Mother of God," and the priest and deacon chimed in: "For to Thee
there again kindled in all those faces the same expression of
momentarily on many and many faces he had met that morning; and
heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back, and sighs and
The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre.
Someone, a very important personage judging by the haste with which
way was made for him, was approaching the icon.
way back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held.
Pierre recognized him at once by his peculiar figure, which
round-shouldered body, with uncovered white head and puffy face
showing the white ball of the eye he had lost, Kutuzov walked with
plunging, swaying gait into the crowd and stopped behind the priest.
He crossed himself with an accustomed movement, bent till he touched
the ground with his hand, and bowed his white head with a deep sigh.
the commander in chief, who attracted the attention of all the
heavily to his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long time tried
weight. His white head twitched with the effort. At last he rose,
kissed the icon as a child does with naively pouting lips, and again
followed his example, then the officers, and after them with excited
faces, pressing on one another, crowding, panting, and pushing,
scrambled the soldiers and militiamen.
CHAPTER XXII
Staggering amid the crush, Pierre looked about him.
"Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you get here?" said a voice.
Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetskoy, brushing his knees with his
hand (he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the
icon), came up to him smiling. Boris was elegantly dressed, with a
to fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug. An immense and
brilliant suite surrounded him.
The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. Pierre
stopped some thirty paces from Kutuzov, talking to Boris.
him. But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us.
We are just going to the left flank. Then when we get back, do spend
the night with me and we'll arrange a game of cards. Of course you
know Dmitri Sergeevich? Those are his quarters," and he pointed to the
third house in the village of Gorki.
strong," said Pierre. "I should like to start from the Moskva River
and ride round the whole position."
"Well, you can do that later, but the chief thing is the left
flank."
"Yes, yes. But where is Prince Bolkonski's regiment? Can you point
"Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him."
"What about the left flank?" asked Pierre
"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, God only knows what state
"It is not at all what Count Bennigsen intended. He meant to fortify
that knoll quite differently, but..." Boris shrugged his shoulders,
Kutuzov's adjutant, came up to Pierre. "Ah, Kaysarov!" said Boris,
Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff,
Boris had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes. He
invaluable man.
In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties:
belonged to the latter and no one else, while showing servile
respect to Kutuzov, could so create an impression that the old
the decisive moment of battle had come when Kutuzov would be destroyed
and the power pass to Bennigsen, or even if Kutuzov won the battle
many great rewards would have to be given for tomorrow's action, and
all day.
After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had
not time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered
upon him, or to listen to all that was told him. The faces all
expressed animation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the
cause of the excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly in
questions of personal success; his mind, however, was occupied by
the different expression he saw on other faces--an expression that
and death. Kutuzov noticed Pierre's figure and the group gathered
round him.
An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness' wish, and Pierre
"How did that fellow get here?" asked Pierre.
been degraded, you know. Now he wants to bob up again. He's been
proposing some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy's picket
line at night.... He's a brave fellow."
Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov.
"I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might
send me away or say that you knew what I was reporting, but then I
shouldn't lose anything..." Dolokhov was saying.
"But if I were right, I should be rendering a service to my
"Yes, yes."
his skin, please think of me.... Perhaps I may prove useful to your
Serene Highness."
"Yes... Yes..." Kutuzov repeated, his laughing eye narrowing more
and more as he looked at Pierre.
Just then Boris, with his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up to
Pierre's side near Kutuzov and in a most natural manner, without
raising his voice, said to Pierre, as though continuing an interrupted
conversation:
"The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die. What
heroism, Count!"
those words, and so it was.
"What are you saying about the militia?" he asked Boris.
have put on clean shirts."
"Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov; and he closed
his eyes and swayed his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated with a
Is she well? My quarters are at your service."
And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov began looking about
absent-mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.
Then, evidently remembering what he wanted, he beckoned to Andrew
"Those verses... those verses of Marin's... how do they go, eh?
Those he wrote about Gerakov: 'Lectures for the corps inditing'...
Kaysarov recited.... Kutuzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm
of the verses.
When Pierre had left Kutuzov, Dolokhov came up to him and took his
hand.
"I am very glad to meet you here, Count," he said aloud,
regardless of the presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute
and solemn tone. "On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of us
I regret the misunderstandings that occurred between us and should
wish you not to have any ill feeling for me. I beg you to forgive me."
Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not knowing what to say to
Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line.
"Yes, very much," replied Pierre.
Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova, and Bennigsen and
line.
CHAPTER XXIII
From Gorki, Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which,
when they had looked it from the hill, the officer had pointed out
as being the center of our position and where rows of fragrant
new-mown hay lay by the riverside. They rode across that bridge into
the village of Borodino and thence turned to the left, passing an
afterwards became known as the Raevski Redoubt, or the Knoll
that it would become more memorable to him than any other spot on
the plain of Borodino.
dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns. Then they rode
*A kind of entrenchment.
Redoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where several
or Murat was there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of
horsemen. Pierre also looked at them, trying to guess which of the
rode away from the mound and disappeared.
Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him, and began
explaining the whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him,
impending battle, but was mortified to feel that his mental capacity
was inadequate for the task. He could make nothing of it. Bennigsen
stopped speaking and, noticing that Pierre was listening, suddenly
said to him:
"On the contrary it's very interesting!" replied Pierre not quite
truthfully.
From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, along a road
winding through a thick, low-growing birch wood. In the middle of
the wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and, scared by the
tramp of the many horses, grew so confused that it leaped along the
road in front of them for some time, arousing general attention and
laughter, and only when several voices shouted at it did it dart to
one side and disappear in the thicket. After going through the wood
for about a mile and a half they came out on a glade where troops of
Tuchkov's corps were stationed to defend the left flank.
Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennigsen talked a great deal and
with much heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, gave orders of great
country around unoccupied and to place troops below it. Some of the
martial heat that they were put there to be slaughtered. Bennigsen
on his own authority ordered the troops to occupy the high ground.
he quite understood them and shared their opinion, but for that very
reason he could not understand how the man who put them there behind
the hill could have made so gross and palpable a blunder.
Pierre did not know that these troops were not, as Bennigsen
position as an ambush, that they should not be seen and might be
know this and moved the troops forward according to his own ideas
without mentioning the matter to the commander in chief.
CHAPTER XXIV
his elbow in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkovo at the
which shocks of oats were standing, and some bushes near which rose
the smoke of campfires--the soldiers' kitchens.
Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed
to him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable
as he had done seven years before at Austerlitz.
He had received and given the orders for next day's battle and had
nothing more to do. But his thoughts--the simplest, clearest, and
therefore most terrible thoughts--would give him no peace. He knew
taken part in, and for the first time in his life the possibility of
or with reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation to
himself, to his own soul--vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as
a certainty. And from the height of this perception all that had
previously tormented and preoccupied him suddenly became illumined
by a cold white light without shadows, without perspective, without
clear daylight and without a glass. "Yes, yes! There they are, those
his clear perception of death. "There they are, those rudely painted
figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious. Glory, the good of
pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning they seemed to
white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me." The three
for a woman, his father's death, and the French invasion which had
brimming over with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her. I made
romantic plans of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy I
was!" he said aloud bitterly. "Ah me! I believed in some ideal love
"When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his: his
unconscious of his existence, as he might brush a chip from his
Mary says it is a trial sent from above. What is the trial for, when
the trial intended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow! And
tomorrow I shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one
one of them did yesterday, and the French will come and take me by
head and heels and fling me into a hole that I may not stink under
their noses, and new conditions of life will arise, which will seem
quite ordinary to others and about which I shall know nothing. I shall
not exist..."
He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine, with
their motionless green and yellow foliage and white bark. "To die...
should still be, but no me...."
And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, the
quickly, went out of the shed, and began to walk about.
that?" he cried.
shyly entered the shed followed by an adjutant and the regimental
about, gave them some further instructions, and was about to dismiss
"Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumbling over something.
over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. It
general, and Pierre especially, for he reminded him of all the painful
moments of his last visit to Moscow.
unexpected!"
As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness--they
the shed full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew's face he felt
constrained and ill at ease.
Pierre, who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word
"interesting." "I wish to see the battle."
they stop it?" said Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how's
Moscow? And my people? Have they reached Moscow at last?" he asked
seriously.
"Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskaya told me so. I went to see them,
but missed them. They have gone to your estate near Moscow."
The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparently
reluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay and
have tea. Seats were brought in and so was the tea. The officers gazed
with surprise at Pierre's huge stout figure and listened to his talk
of Moscow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden.
Prince Andrew remained silent, and his expression was so forbidding
that Pierre addressed his remarks chiefly to the good-natured
Andrew interrupted him.
"Yes--that is, how do you mean?" said Pierre. "Not being a
military man I can't say I have understood it fully, but I
understand the general position."
Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew. "Well, and what do think of Kutuzov's appointment?"
"I was very glad of his appointment, that's all I know," replied
Prince Andrew.
saying heaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?"
Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogative
smile with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer.
excellency," said Timokhin timidly, and continually turning to
"Why so?" asked Pierre.
"Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you.
get it all; wasn't it so, your excellency?" and again Timokhin
were court-martialed for that kind of thing. But when his Serenity
took command everything became straight forward. Now we see light..."
"Then why was it forbidden?"
answer such a question. Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew.
"Why, so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to the
enemy," said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. "It is very sound: one
can't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops to
this," cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape him
involuntarily: "he could not understand that there, for the first
time, we were fighting for Russian soil, and that there was a spirit
losses went for nothing. He had no thought of betraying us, he tried
to do the best he could, he thought out everything, and that is why he
everything very thoroughly and accurately as every German has to.
How can I explain?... Well, say your father has a German valet, and he
father is mortally sick you'll send the valet away and attend to
soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could. So it
serve her and be a splendid minister; but as soon as she is in
making him out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and the
only result will be that afterwards, ashamed of their false
accusations, they will make him out a hero or a genius instead of a
traitor, and that will be still more unjust. He is an honest and
"I don't understand what is meant by 'a skillful commander,'"
replied Prince Andrew ironically.
"A skillful commander?" replied Pierre. "Why, one who foresees all
Pierre looked at him in surprise.
"And yet they say that war is like a game of chess?" he remarked.
in chess you may think over each move as long as you please and are
not limited for time, and with this difference too, that a knight is
one, while in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division
and sometimes weaker than a company. The relative strength of bodies
of troops can never be known to anyone. Believe me," he went on, "if
things depended on arrangements made by the staff, I should be there
making arrangements, but instead of that I have the honor to serve
here in the regiment with these gentlemen, and I consider that on us
never depends, and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or
"But on what then?"
"On the feeling that is in me and in him," he pointed to Timokhin,
"and in each soldier."
alarm and bewilderment. In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity
Prince Andrew now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain from
"A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we
to ours, but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the
battle, and we did lose it. And we said so because we had nothing to
fight for there, we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon as
we could. 'We've lost, so let us run,' and we ran. If we had not
said that till the evening, heaven knows what might not have happened.
But tomorrow we shan't say it! You talk about our position, the left
flank weak and the right flank too extended," he went on. "That's
on the instant by the fact that our men or theirs run or do not run,
present is only play. The fact is that those men with whom you have
ridden round the position not only do not help matters, but hinder.
"At such a moment?" said Pierre reproachfully.
moment affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an
extra cross or ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a
win. And if you like I will tell you that whatever happens and
Timokhin. "Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my
battalion, believe me, wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the day
for that!' they say."
All were silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of the
conversation when they heard the clatter of three horses' hoofs on the
road not far from the shed, and looking in that direction Prince
Andrew recognized Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack.
involuntarily heard these words:
"Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nicht
genug Preis geben,"* said one of them.
*"The war must be extended widely. I cannot sufficiently commend
that view."
"Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwachen,
*"Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, so of course one
cannot take into account the loss of private individuals."
"Oh, no," agreed the other.
had ridden past. "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sister, at
Bald Hills. That's all the same to him! That's what I was saying to
German heads but theories not worth an empty eggshell and haven't in
They have yielded up all Europe to him, and have now come to teach us.
Fine teachers!" and again his voice grew shrill.
if I had the power," he began again, "I would not take prisoners.
and are on their way to destroy Moscow, they have outraged and are
should be executed! Since they are my foes they cannot be my
friends, whatever may have been said at Tilsit."
"Yes, yes," muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Prince
The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and
all that day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. He
impending battle. All he had seen that day, all the significant and
physics) of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen,
and as it were lightheartedly.
"Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew continued: "That by itself would
quite change the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we have
she is so kind-hearted that she can't look at blood, but enjoys eating
the calf served up with sauce. They talk to us of the rules of war, of
chivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on.
It's all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805; they
houses, issue false paper money, and worst of all they kill my
children and my father, and then talk of rules of war and
magnanimity to foes! Take no prisoners, but kill and be killed! He who
has come to this as I have through the same sufferings..."
Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all the same to him whether or
not Moscow was taken as Smolensk had been, was suddenly checked in his
speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down a
few times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips
"If there was none of this magnanimity in war, we should go to war
And then the determination of the troops would be quite different.
Austria and Prussia without knowing why. War is not courtesy but the
most horrible thing in life; and we ought to understand that and not
"But what is war? What is needed for success in warfare? What are
the habits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of
war are spying, treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of a
and fraud and falsehood termed military craft. The habits of the
idleness, ignorance, cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness. And in
"They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to murder one another; they
kill and maim tens of thousands, and then have thanksgiving services
and they announce a victory, supposing that the more people they
have killed the greater their achievement. How does God above look
at them and hear them?" exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill,
piercing voice. "Ah, my friend, it has of late become hard for me to
"However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sleep. Go back to
Gorki!" said Prince Andrew suddenly.
"Oh no!" Pierre replied, looking at Prince Andrew with frightened,
compassionate eyes.
"Good-by, be off!" he shouted. "Whether we meet again or not..."
and turning away hurriedly he entered the shed.
For some time he stood in silence considering whether he should
follow him or go away. "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded.
"And I know that this is our last meeting!" He sighed deeply and
rode back to Gorki.
could not sleep.
He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded another in his
imagination. On one of them he dwelt long and joyfully. He vividly
recalled an evening in Petersburg. Natasha with animated and excited
face was telling him how she had gone to look for mushrooms the
talk with a beekeeper she met, and constantly interrupted her story to
say: "No, I can't! I'm not telling it right; no, you don't
understand," though he encouraged her by saying that he did
understand, and he really had understood all she wanted to say. But
Natasha was not satisfied with her own words: she felt that they did
day and wished to convey. "He was such a delightful old man, and it
was so dark in the forest... and he had such kind... No, I can't
describe it," she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrew
smiled now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her
but it was just that inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that
frankness of soul--that very soul of hers which seemed to be
ended. "He did not need anything of that kind. He neither saw nor
young girl, with whom he did not deign to unite his fate. And I?...
and he is still alive and gay!"
Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again
began pacing up and down in front of the shed.
CHAPTER XXVI
prefect of the French Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon's quarters
at Valuevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the
latter from Madrid.
Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he had
brought for the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the first
conversing with Napoleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him.
Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at the entrance talking
his back and now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his
valet was rubbing him down. Another valet, with his finger over the
mouth of a bottle, was sprinkling Eau de Cologne on the Emperor's
pampered body with an expression which seemed to say that he alone
knew where and how much Eau de Cologne should be sprinkled. Napoleon's
short hair was wet and matted on the forehead, but his face, though
puffy and yellow, expressed physical satisfaction. "Go on, harder,
go on!" he muttered to the valet who was rubbing him, slightly
twitching and grunting. An aide-de-camp, who had entered the bedroom
to report to the Emperor the number of prisoners taken in
"No prisoners!" said he, repeating the aide-de-camp's words. "They
Russian army.... Go on... harder, harder!" he muttered, hunching his
said, nodding to the aide-de-camp.
"Yes, sire," and the aide-de-camp disappeared through the door of
the tent.
of the Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.
De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging the
surprise.
Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that
they were not ready. He did not wish to deprive them of the pleasure
called Fabvier to him, listening silently and with a stern frown to
thought--to be worthy of their Emperor--and but one fear--to fail to
made ironic remarks during Fabvier's account, as if he had not
"I must make up for that in Moscow," said Napoleon. "I'll see you
prepared the surprise, having placed something on the chairs and
old retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approached him,
presenting an envelope.
Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ear.
"You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, what is Paris saying?"
he asked, suddenly changing his former stern expression for a most
cordial tone.
"Sire, all Paris regrets your absence," replied de Beausset as was
proper.
But though Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something of
this kind, and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he
was pleased to hear it from him. Again he honored him by touching
"Sire, I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of
Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absentmindedly, glanced to the
right. An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him a
gold snuffbox, which he took.
"Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he said, raising the open
snuffbox to his nose. "You are fond of travel, and in three days you
De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel
(of which he had not till then been aware).
"Ha, what's this?" asked Napoleon, noticing that all the courtiers
With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without
turning his back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the
represented the terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a
Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by
depicting the so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick,
the allegory apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all
who had seen it in Paris, quite clear and very pleasing.
graceful gesture. "Admirable!"
assumed a look of pensive tenderness. He felt that what he now said
and did would be historical, and it seemed to him that it would now be
best for him--whose grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ball
with the terrestrial globe--to show, in contrast to that grandeur, the
simplest paternal tenderness. His eyes grew dim, he moved forward,
glanced round at a chair (which seemed to place itself under him), and
sat down on it before the portrait. At a single gesture from him
Having sat still for a while he touched--himself not knowing why-
portrait, rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty. He
seeing the King of Rome, the son and heir of their adored monarch.
And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting with
him, they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries of
those ecstatic cries.
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated his
order of the day to the army.
"Short and energetic!" he remarked when he had read over the
proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections.
It ran:
remotest posterity recall your achievements this day with pride. Let
it be said of each of you: "He was in the great battle before Moscow!"
was so fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out of
"Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation to
accompany the Emperor; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ride
When Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before
his son's portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.
gesture to the portrait. "It is too soon for him to see a field of
battle."
De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sighed deeply, to
words.
CHAPTER XXVII
considering plans submitted to him by his marshals, and personally
giving commands to his generals.
The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolocha
had been dislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the
twenty-fourth, and part of the line--the left flank--had been drawn
the ground was more open and level than elsewhere. It was evident to
anyone, military or not, that it was here the French should attack. It
would seem that not much consideration was needed to reach this
Emperor and his marshals, nor was there any need of that special and
Napoleon; yet the historians who described the event later and the men
profound air and in silence, nodded with approval or shook his head
dubiously, and without communicating to the generals around him the
profound course of ideas which guided his decisions merely gave them
his final conclusions in the form of commands. Having listened to a
the Russian left wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, without
explaining why not. To a proposal made by General Campan (who was to
Napoleon pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots
where two batteries should be set up by the morrow to act against
the field artillery should be placed.
After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent, and
These dispositions, of which the French historians write with
follows:
At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the
plain occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the
opposing batteries of the enemy.
At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps,
forward, open fire, and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy's
battery, against which will operate:
        30 guns of Campan's division
and      8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions
The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouche,
will place the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all,
on the flanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on
the left, which will have forty guns in all directed against it.
General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all
the howitzers of the Guard's artillery against either one or other
of the entrenchments.
fortification.
After the advance has begun in this manner, orders will be given
in accordance with the enemy's movements.
The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of
the right wing are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand's division and
The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its three
divisions, which under his leadership will be directed against the
redoubt and come into line with the rest of the forces.
All this must be done in good order (le tout se fera avec ordre et
methode) as far as possible retaining troops in reserve.
   September, 6, 1812.
These dispositions, which are very obscure and confused if one
genius, related to Napoleon's orders to deal with four points--four
different orders. Not one of these was, or could be, carried out.
In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on the
spot chosen by Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche; which
were to come in line with them, 102 guns in all, were to open fire and
shower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts. This could not be
carry to the Russian works, and those 102 guns shot into the air until
the nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon's instructions, moved them
forward.
The second order was that Poniatowski, moving to the village through
and was not done, because Poniatowski, advancing on the village
through the wood, met Tuchkov there barring his way, and could not and
The third order was: General Campan will move through the wood to
the wood it had to reform under grapeshot, of which Napoleon was
The fourth order was: The vice-King will occupy the village
(Borodino) and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the same
directions are given), which under his leadership will be directed
As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelligible
sentence as from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the orders
redoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gerard were to advance
simultaneously from the front.
driven back to the Kolocha and could get no farther; while the
divisions of Morand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but were
driven back, and the redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle
Napoleon). So not one of the orders in the disposition was, or could
fight has commenced in this manner, orders will be given in accordance
necessary arrangements would be made by Napoleon during the battle.
But this was not and could not be done, for during the whole battle
the course of the battle and not one of his orders during the fight
CHAPTER XXVIII
Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of
Borodino because Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had a
cold the orders he gave before and during the battle would have been
still more full of genius and Russia would have been lost and the face
of the world have been changed. To historians who believe that
Russia was shaped by the will of one man--Peter the Great--and that
may seem logical and convincing.
If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fight or not to fight the
on his will, then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of
would have been the savior of Russia. Along that line of thought
such a deduction is indubitable, as indubitable as the deduction
Voltaire made in jest (without knowing what he was jesting at) when he
saw that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX's
formed by the will of one man, Peter I, or that the French Empire
was formed and the war with Russia begun by the will of one man,
Napoleon, that argument seems not merely untrue and irrational, but
contrary to all human reality. To the question of what causes historic
he gave the order for it and thought it was done as a result of that
order; and strange as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter of
was done because he ordered it; strange as these suppositions
appear, yet human dignity--which tells me that each of us is, if not
more at least not less a man than the great Napoleon--demands the
acceptance of that solution of the question, and historic
investigation abundantly confirms it.
That was all done by the soldiers. Therefore it was not he who
The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of
Borodino not because of Napoleon's orders but by their own volition.
The whole army--French, Italian, German, Polish, and Dutch--hungry,
ragged, and weary of the campaign, felt at the sight of an army
would have killed him and have proceeded to fight the Russians because
their having been in the battle before Moscow, they cried "Vive
l'Empereur!" just as they had cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at the sight of
nonsense that might be told them. There was nothing left for them to
do but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and go to fight, in order to get food
and rest as conquerors in Moscow. So it was not because of
Napoleon's commands that they killed their fellow men.
Napoleon that it all took place by his will. And so the question
whether he had or had not a cold has no more historic interest than
the cold of the least of the transport soldiers.
the cause of his dispositions not being as well planned as on former
occasions, and of his orders during the battle not being as good as
previously, is quite baseless, which again shows that Napoleon's
better, than previous dispositions by which he had won victories.
His pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse than
formerly, but much the same as usual. These dispositions and orders
was the first Napoleon did not win. The profoundest and most excellent
dispositions and orders seem very bad, and every learned militarist
criticizes them with looks of importance, when they relate to a
battle that has been lost, and the very worst dispositions and
orders seem very good, and serious people fill whole volumes to
won.
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of
Austerlitz were a model of perfection for that kind of composition,
but still they were criticized--criticized for their very
inclined to the most reasonable opinions, he made no confusion, did
carried out his role of appearing to command, calmly and with dignity.
CHAPTER XXIX
On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon
"The chessmen are set up, the game will begin tomorrow!"
He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's love
of travel, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeon
his apron while a patient is being strapped to the operating table.
could, but now I can jest, and the more I jest and the calmer I am the
more tranquil and confident you ought to be, and the more amazed at my
before the serious business which, he considered, awaited him next
day. He was so much interested in that task that he was unable to
sleep, and in spite of his cold which had grown worse from the
dampness of the evening, he went into the large division of the tent
at three o'clock in the morning, loudly blowing his nose. He asked
whether the Russians had not withdrawn, and was told that the
asked him.
"Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp.
Napoleon looked at him.
Smolensk?" continued Rapp. "The wine is drawn and must be drunk."
since Smolensk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always
said so and I am beginning to experience it. But the Guards, Rapp, the
Guards are intact?" he remarked interrogatively.
impossible to give further orders for the sake of killing time, for
the orders had all been given and were now being executed.
"Yes, sire."
"The rice too?"
that his order had been executed. An attendant came in with punch.
Napoleon ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silently
good of medicine when it can't cure a cold! Corvisart gave me these
lozenges but they don't help at all. What can doctors cure? One
for that, it is its nature. Let life go on in it unhindered and let it
encumbering it with remedies. Our body is like a perfect watch that
should go for a certain time; watchmaker cannot open it, he can only
And having entered on the path of definition, of which he was
art of being stronger than the enemy at a given moment. That's all."
"Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Napoleon. "We
shall see! Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three
He rose, walked to and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went
out of the tent. The night was dark and damp, a scarcely perceptible
moisture was descending from above. Near by, the campfires were
dimly burning among the French Guards, and in the distance those of
the rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to
Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires
and listened to these sounds, and as he was passing a tall guardsman
drawn himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon
stopped in front of him.
"What year did you enter the service?" he asked with that
addressed the soldiers.
The man answered the question.
"Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its rice?"
At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino.
in the faint morning light.
away in the prevailing silence. Some minutes passed. A second and a
third report shook the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomed
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he
dismounted. The game had begun.
On returning to Gorki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre
morning, and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a
Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already
left the hut. The panes were rattling in the little windows and his
"Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excellency!" he kept
repeating pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without
looking at him, having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up.
"Hear the firing," said the groom, a discharged soldier. "All the
gentlemen have gone out, and his Serene Highness himself rode past
long ago."
Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch. Outside all was
behind a cloud that had concealed it, was shining, with rays still
the dew-besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, on
the street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of
battle the day before. A crowd of military men was assembled there,
members of the staff could be heard conversing in French, and
gray nape sunk between his shoulders. He was looking through a field
Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before
him, spellbound by beauty. It was the same panorama he had admired
from that spot the day before, but now the whole place was full of
troops and covered by smoke clouds from the guns, and the slanting
rays of the bright sun, rising slightly to the left behind Pierre,
farthest extremity of the panorama seemed carved in some precious
stone of a yellowish-green color; its undulating outline was
the Smolensk highroad crowded with troops. Nearer at hand glittered
golden cornfields interspersed with copses. There were troops to be
vivid, majestic, and unexpected; but what impressed Pierre most of all
was the view of the battlefield itself, of Borodino and the hollows on
and to become translucent when the brilliant sun appeared and
magically colored and outlined everything. The smoke of the guns
mingled with this mist, and over the whole expanse and through that
mist the rays of the morning sun were reflected, flashing back like
lightning from the water, from the dew, and from the bayonets of the
troops crowded together by the riverbanks and in Borodino. A white
church could be seen through the mist, and here and there the roofs of
huts in Borodino as well as dense masses of soldiers, or green
ammunition chests and ordnance. And all this moved, or seemed to move,
as the smoke and mist spread out over the whole space. Just as in
the mist-enveloped hollow near Borodino, so along the entire line
left, in the valleys and on the summits of the high ground, clouds
of powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out of nothing, now
singly, now several at a time, some translucent, others dense,
the firing produced the chief beauty of the spectacle.
"Puff!"--suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging
from violet into gray and milky white, and "boom!" came the report a
Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as a
three and then four more appeared and then from each, with the same
reply. It seemed as if those smoke clouds sometimes ran and
sometimes stood still while woods, fields, and glittering bayonets ran
past them. From the left, over fields and bushes, those large balls of
smoke were continually appearing followed by their solemn reports,
while nearer still, in the hollows and woods, there burst from the
their little echoes in just the same way. "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came the
frequent crackle of musketry, but it was irregular and feeble in
Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, those shining bayonets,
that movement, and those sounds. He turned to look at Kutuzov and
were all looking at the field of battle as he was, and, as it seemed
to him, with the same feelings. All their faces were now shining
and had fully understood after his talk with Prince Andrew.
saying to a general who stood beside him, not taking his eye from
the battlefield.
"I'll go there too, I too!" thought Pierre, and followed the
The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him. Pierre went
quietest, clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turning out
reins, he galloped after the general, causing the staff officers to
CHAPTER XXXI
Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was
galloping turned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him,
tried to pass either in front of them or to the right or left, but
unseen but evidently important task. They all gazed with the same
dissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white
hat, who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under
at him.
Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre,
horse, galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space.
There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stood
firing. Pierre rode up to them. Without being aware of it he had
come to the bridge across the Kolocha between Gorki and Borodino,
which the French (having occupied Borodino) were attacking in the
of him and that soldiers were doing something on both sides of it
and in the meadow, among the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken
no notice of amid the smoke of the campfires the day before; but
was the field of battle. He did not notice the sound of the bullets
did not see the enemy on the other side of the river, and for a long
time did not notice the killed and wounded, though many fell near him.
He looked about him with a smile which did not leave his face.
"Why's that fellow in front of the line?" shouted somebody at him
again.
Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one of
Raevski's adjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked angrily at
him he nodded.
"How have you got here?" he said, and galloped on.
"One moment, one moment!" replied the adjutant, and riding up to a
stout colonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some message
and then addressed Pierre.
"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.
"Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Bagration on the left
"Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there and
groom.
the day before, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay,
with his head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off.
"Why haven't they carried him away?" Pierre was about to ask, but
that way, he checked himself.
Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the
adjutant to Raevski's Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the
"You don't seem to be used to riding, Count?" remarked the adjutant.
"No it's not that, but her action seems so jerky," said Pierre in
a puzzled tone.
"Why... she's wounded!" said the adjutant. "In the off foreleg above
artillery which had been moved forward and was in action, deafening
them with the noise of firing, they came to a small wood. There it was
cool and quiet, with a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutant
dismounted and walked up the hill on foot.
The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now.
I may?"
"Yes, do. You'll see everything from there and it's less
dangerous, and I'll come for you."
Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did not
meet again, and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm
The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards
known to the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski's Redoubt, and
trenches had been dug. Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that
were being fired through openings in the earthwork.
In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also
fired incessantly. A little behind the guns stood infantry. When
ascending that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which
small trenches had been dug and from which a few guns were firing, was
On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thought
it one of the least significant parts of the field.
Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trench
surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with
an unconsciously happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked about
the battery still with that same smile, trying not to obstruct the
soldiers who were loading, hauling the guns, and continually running
past him with bags and charges. The guns of that battery were being
fired continually one after another with a deafening roar,
enveloping the whole neighborhood in powder smoke.
support, here in the battery where a small number of men busy at their
an unpleasant impression at first. The soldiers looked askance at
him with surprise and even alarm as they went past him. The senior
artillery officer, a tall, long-legged, pockmarked man, moved over
him with curiosity.
guns entrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly.
"Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must not
be here."
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at
soldiers, paced up and down the battery under fire as calmly as if
began to change into a kindly and bantering sympathy, such as soldiers
family, adopted him, gave him a nickname ("our gentleman"), and made
with a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown
"And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really now?" a red-faced,
broad-shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a
set of sound, white teeth.
"Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre.
"What else do you expect?" answered the soldier. "She has no
mercy, you know! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards.
One can't help being afraid," he said laughing.
Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre.
"It's the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it's
wonderful! There's a gentleman for you!"
round Pierre.
The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing
more intense over the whole field, especially to the left where
from all else--formed by the men in the battery. His first unconscious
feeling of joyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of the
battlefield was now replaced by another, especially since he had
seen that soldier lying alone in the hayfield. Now, seated on the
slope of the trench, he observed the faces of those around him.
By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from
frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled
around. But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, and
"A live one!" shouted a man as a whistling shell approached.
"Not this way! To the infantry!" added another with loud laughter,
"Are you bowing to a friend, eh?" remarked another, chaffing a
peasant who ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.
"They've withdrawn the front line, it has retired," said they,
"Mind your own business," an old sergeant shouted at them. "If
And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him a
shove with his knee. This was followed by a burst of laughter.
"To the fifth gun, wheel it up!" came shouts from one side.
"Now then, all together, like bargees!" rose the merry voices of
red-faced humorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre. "Awkward
"Now then, you foxes!" said another, laughing at some militiamen
who, stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.
"So this gruel isn't to your taste? Oh, you crows! You're scared!"
whose leg had been torn off.
like it at all!"
Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and after
every loss, the liveliness increased more and more.
As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly
opposition to what was taking place, the lightning of hidden fire
growing more and more intense glowed in the faces of these men.
Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned
to know what was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watching
this fire which burned ever more brightly and which he felt was
flaming up in the same way in his own soul.
At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in
front of the battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated. From
wounded on their muskets. A general with his suite came to the
battery to lie down, so as to be less exposed to fire. After this from
amid the ranks of infantry to the right of the battery came the
Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly
struck by a pale young officer who, letting his sword hang down, was
The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their
long-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard. A few
in the battery. Several men were lying about who had not been removed.
Around the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily. No
one any longer took notice of Pierre. Once or twice he was shouted
strides from one gun to another with a frowning face. The young
officer, with his face still more flushed, commanded the men more
scrupulously than ever. The soldiers handed up the charges, turned,
The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire
which Pierre had watched kindle burned up brightly. Pierre standing
shako, ran up to his superior.
"I have the honor to report, sir, that only eight rounds are left.
looking over the wall of the trench.
bending double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing.
Everything became strange, confused, and misty in Pierre's eyes.
One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the
earthwork, a soldier, or a gun. Pierre, who had not noticed these
sounds before, now heard nothing else. On the right of the battery
soldiers shouting "Hurrah!" were running not forwards but backwards,
it seemed to Pierre.
was standing, crumbling down the earth; a black ball flashed before
"All with grapeshot!" shouted the officer.
The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper
informed him (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is
no more of some wine asked for) that there were no more charges.
"The scoundrels! What are they doing?" shouted the officer,
under his frowning brow.
yelled, angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men.
"I'll go," said Pierre.
The officer, without answering him, strode across to the opposite
side.
"Don't fire.... Wait!" he shouted.
The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled against
Pierre.
"Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, and ran down the
slope.
Pierre ran after him, avoiding the spot where the young officer
One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling in
front, beside, and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. "Where am
ammunition wagons. He halted irresolutely, not knowing whether to
the ground. At the same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of
flame, and immediately a deafening roar, crackling, and whistling made
his ears tingle.
existed, only charred green boards and rags littered the scorched
galloped past, while another horse lay, like Pierre, on the ground,
uttering prolonged and piercing cries.
Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the
battery, as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him.
On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doing
examining something down below and that one of the soldiers he had
noticed before was struggling forward shouting "Brothers!" and
that the soldier shouting "Brothers!" was a prisoner, and that another
man had been bayoneted in the back before his eyes, for hardly had
he run into the redoubt before a thin, sallow-faced, perspiring man in
a blue uniform rushed on him sword in hand, shouting something.
Instinctively guarding against the shock--for they had been running
together at full speed before they saw one another--Pierre put out his
hands and seized the man (a French officer) by the shoulder with one
hand and by the throat with the other. The officer, dropping his
sword, seized Pierre by his collar.
For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another's
what they were to do next. "Am I taken prisoner or have I taken him
strong hand, impelled by instinctive fear, squeezed his throat ever
tighter and tighter. The Frenchman was about to say something, when
and wounded who, it seemed to him, caught at his feet. But before he
soldiers who, stumbling, tripping up, and shouting, ran merrily and
claimed the credit, declaring that only his courage and good luck made
such a feat possible: it was the attack in which he was said to have
thrown some St. George's Crosses he had in his pocket into the battery
for the first soldiers to take who got there.)
The French who had occupied the battery fled, and our troops
was difficult to call them back.
The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among them
was a wounded French general, whom the officers surrounded. Crowds
French, with faces distorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and were
the knoll where he had spent over an hour, and of that family circle
which had received him as a member he did not find a single one. There
were many dead whom he did not know, but some he recognized. The young
officer still sat in the same way, bent double, in a pool of blood
at the edge of the earth wall. The red-faced man was still
twitching, but they did not carry him away.
Pierre ran down the slope once more.
and especially to the left, near Semenovsk, something seemed to be
seething in the smoke, and the roar of cannon and musketry did not
diminish, but even increased to desperation like a man who,
straining himself, shrieks with all his remaining strength.
CHAPTER XXXIII
The chief action of the battle of Borodino was fought within the
Russians with Uvarov's cavalry at midday, and on the other side,
beyond Utitsa, Poniatowski's collision with Tuchkov; but these two
were detached and feeble actions in comparison with what took place in
fleches, beside the wood, the chief action of the day took place on an
The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred
Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions,
Campan's and Dessaix's, advanced from the French right, while
Murat's troops advanced on Borodino from their left.
From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the
fleches were two thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as
the crow flies to Borodino, so that Napoleon could not see what was
happening there, especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hid
the whole locality. The soldiers of Dessaix's division advancing
descended into that hollow, the smoke of the guns and musketry on
side of it. Through the smoke glimpses could be caught of something
black--probably men--and at times the glint of bayonets. But whether
could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt.
The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight
into Napoleon's face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked
looked as if the smoke were moving, at times as if the troops moved.
Sometimes shouts were heard through the firing, but it was
impossible to tell what was being done there.
Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and
He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.
Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firing, and gazed
But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from
where he was standing down below, or from the knoll above on which
some of his generals had taken their stand, but even from the
fleches themselves--in which by this time there were now Russian and
now French soldiers, alternately or together, dead, wounded, alive,
frightened, or maddened--even at those fleches themselves it was
impossible to make out what was taking place. There for several
seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now infantry, and now cavalry: they
appeared, fired, fell, collided, not knowing what to do with one
another, screamed, and ran back again.
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out, and orderlies from
his marshals, kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the
progress of the action, but all these reports were false, both because
it was impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at
actual place of conflict but reported what they had heard from others;
Napoleon circumstances changed and the news he brought was already
becoming false. Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings
that Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in
form up on the farther side and wait. But before that order was given-
had been retaken by the Russians and burned, in the very skirmish at
An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and
frightened face and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been
the adjutant had been told that the French had been repulsed, the
fleches had in fact been recaptured by other French troops, and Davout
untrustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders, which had either
executed.
The marshals and generals, who were nearer to the field of battle
arrangements without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in
should run. But even their orders, like Napoleon's, were seldom
meeting grapeshot; soldiers ordered to remain where they were,
suddenly, seeing Russians unexpectedly before them, sometimes rushed
back and sometimes forward, and the cavalry dashed without orders in
pursuit of the flying Russians. In this way two cavalry regiments
galloped through the Semenovsk hollow and as soon as they reached
again. The infantry moved in the same way, sometimes running to
quite other places than those they were ordered to go to. All orders
as to where and when to move the guns, when to send infantry to
without asking either Ney, Davout, or Murat, much less Napoleon.
They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling orders or
for acting on their own initiative, for in battle what is at stake
men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to the
mood of the moment. In reality, however, all these movements forward
and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops.
All their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm, the
flew over the fields on which these men were floundering about. As
soon as they left the place where the balls and bullets were flying
about, their superiors, located in the background, re-formed them
and brought them under discipline and under the influence of that
discipline led them back to the zone of fire, where under the
according to the chance promptings of the throng.
CHAPTER XXXIV
Napoleon's generals--Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that
huge masses of well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had always
disorganized and terrified mobs. The generals re-formed them, but
their numbers constantly decreased. In the middle of the day Murat
sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand reinforcements.
Murat's adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would
be routed if His Majesty would let him have another division.
at the adjutant--a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like
Murat's own--as though he did not understand his words.
"Reinforcements!" thought Napoleon to himself. "How can they need
reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a
weak, unentrenched Russian wing?"
"Tell the King of Naples," said he sternly, "that it is not noon
yet, and I don't yet see my chessboard clearly. Go!..."
The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without
removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were
being slaughtered.
Napoleon, Berthier's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite,
who was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse. It was
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down
without replying. Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the
generals of the suite around him.
"You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napoleon, when he again came up
to the general. "In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake.
Go and have another look and then come back to me."
Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger from another part of
the battlefield galloped up.
"Now then, what do you want?" asked Napoleon in the tone of a man
irritated at being continually disturbed.
"Sire, the prince..." began the adjutant.
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, but
"We must give reserves," he said, moving his arms slightly apart.
subsequently termed "that gosling I have made an eagle").
"Send Claparede's division, sire," replied Berthier, who knew all
the divisions regiments, and battalions by heart.
The adjutant galloped to Claparede's division and a few minutes
Napoleon gazed silently in that direction.
"No!" he suddenly said to Berthier. "I can't send Claparede. Send
Friant's division."
Though there was no advantage in sending Friant's division instead
of Claparede's, and even in obvious inconvenience and delay in
exactly. Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was
playing the part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines--a role he
so justly understood and condemned.
Friant's division disappeared as the others had done into the
at a gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing. They all
Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.
"I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory?" said he.
Beausset ventured with respectful jocularity to remark that there is
no reason for not having lunch when one can get it.
aside.
A beatific smile of regret, repentance, and ecstasy beamed on M.
always winning, suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances
he loses.
His troops were the same, his generals the same, the same
preparations had been made, the same dispositions, and the same
skillful than before. Even the enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and
become impotent.
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with
success: the concentration of batteries on one point, an attack by
of iron," all these methods had already been employed, yet not only
was there no victory, but from all sides came the same news of
impossibility of driving back the Russians, and of disorganization
among his own troops.
Formerly, after he had given two or three orders and uttered a few
congratulations and happy faces, announcing the trophies taken, the
corps of prisoners, bundles of enemy eagles and standards, cannon
and stores, and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry to
gather in the baggage wagons. So it had been at Lodi, Marengo, Arcola,
Jena, Austerlitz, Wagram, and so on. But now something strange was
happening to his troops.
Despite news of the capture of the fleches, Napoleon saw that this
was not the same, not at all the same, as what had happened in his
dejected, and they all shunned one another's eyes--only a de
Beausset could fail to grasp the meaning of what was happening.
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning
efforts had been expended. He knew that it was a lost battle and
strained center--destroy him and his army.
When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaign
in which not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, or
cannon, or army corps had been captured in two months, when he
like a nightmare took possession of him, and all the unlucky accidents
that might destroy him occurred to his mind. The Russians might fall
on his left wing, might break through his center, he himself might
be killed by a stray cannon ball. All this was possible. In former
battles he had only considered the possibilities of success, but now
coming to attack him, and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a
terrible blow which he knows should annihilate him, but then feels
that his arm drops powerless and limp like a rag, and the horror of
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the
French army aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a
"What? What do you say?" asked Napoleon. "Yes, tell them to bring me
He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk.
Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing over the whole space
through which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools of
blood, singly or in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals
area. The roar of guns, that had not ceased for ten hours, wearied the
to tableaux vivants. Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semenovsk,
and through the smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color
The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and its
forth clouds of smoke. It was no longer a battle: it was a
continuous slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French
or the Russians. Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the
by him and to depend on him, and from its lack of success this affair,
for the first time, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to
CHAPTER XXXV
orders, but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested.
"Yes, yes, do that," he replied to various proposals. "Yes, yes: go,
about him; or, "No, don't, we'd better wait!" He listened to the
reports that were brought him and gave directions when his
subordinates demanded that of him; but when listening to the reports
tone of voice of those who were reporting. By long years of military
experience he knew, and with the wisdom of age understood, that it
is impossible for one man to direct hundreds of thousands of others
struggling with death, and he knew that the result of a battle is
decided not by the orders of a commander in chief, nor the place where
the troops are stationed, nor by the number of cannon or of
army, and he watched this force and guided it in as far as that was in
Kutuzov's general expression was one of concentrated quiet
attention, and his face wore a strained look as if he found it
difficult to master the fatigue of his old and feeble body.
"Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly,"
he said to one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of
Wurttemberg who was standing behind him.
"Will Your Highness please take command of the first army?"
Soon after the duke's departure--before he could possibly have
the command of the first army, and a request to the duke--whom he said
he could not spare at such an important moment--to return to him. When
they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the
staff officers congratulated him, Kutuzov smiled.
"Wait a little, gentlemen," said he. "The battle is won, and there
is nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is
When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news that
the French had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk,
Kutuzov, guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin's
taking Scherbinin's arm, led him aside.
"Go, my dear fellow," he said to Ermolov, "and see whether something
can't be done."
Kutuzov was in Gorki, near the center of the Russian position. The
attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several
times repulsed. In the center the French had not got beyond
Borodino, and on their left flank Uvarov's cavalry had put the
French to flight.
Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces of
all who came from the field of battle, and of those who stood around
him, Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension. He was
times his head dropped low as if it were falling and he dozed off.
Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince
Bagration so detested, rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner. Wolzogen
had come from Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on
weighed all the circumstances, concluded that the battle was lost, and
glanced at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering
Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, approached Kutuzov
with a half-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peak
of his cap.
that he knew whom he was dealing with. "Der alte Herr" (as in their
comfortable," thought Wolzogen, and looking severely at the dishes
position of affairs on the left flank as Barclay had ordered him to
and as he himself had seen and understood it.
"All the points of our position are in the enemy's hands and we
Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen,
as if not understand what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing "the old
gentleman's" agitation, said with a smile:
what I have seen. The troops are in complete disorder..."
"You have seen? You have seen?..." Kutuzov shouted frowning, and
"How... how dare you!..." he shouted, choking and making a
threatening gesture with his trembling arms: "How dare you, sir, say
that to me? You know nothing about it. Tell General Barclay from me
that his information is incorrect and that the real course of the
battle is better known to me, the commander in chief, than to him."
"The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right
flank. If you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say
what you don't know! Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and
inform him of my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow," said
Kutuzov sternly.
breathing of the panting old general.
"They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank God and our brave
sacred soil of Russia," said Kutuzov crossing himself, and he suddenly
sobbed as his eyes filled with tears.
Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips, stepped
silently aside, marveling at "the old gentleman's" conceited
stupidity.
"Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a portly, handsome,
dark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll.
important part of the field of Borodino.
and that the French no longer ventured to attack.
After hearing him, Kutuzov said in French:
"Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?"
"On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it is
always the most stubborn who remain victors," replied Raevski, "and in
my opinion..."
"Kaysarov!" Kutuzov called to his adjutant. "Sit down and write
addressing another, "ride along the line and that tomorrow we attack."
While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order of
Kutuzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for the
order to be written out which the former commander in chief, to
And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains
throughout an army one and the same temper, known as "the spirit of
his order for a battle next day, immediately became known from one end
of the army to the other.
Kutuzov had said, but the sense of his words spread everywhere because
what he said was not the outcome of cunning calculations, but of a
And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, and
to believe, the exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.
CHAPTER XXXVI
Prince Andrew's regiment was among the reserves which till after one
artillery fire. Toward two o'clock the regiment, having already lost
more than two hundred men, was moved forward into a trampled
thousands of men perished that day and on which an intense,
one and two o'clock.
Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment
here lost another third of its men. From in front and especially
from the right, in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed, and out of the
mysterious domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front,
At times, as if to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passed
during which the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead, but
carried off.
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those
not yet killed. The regiment stood in columns of battalion, three
a successful shot and the cry of "stretchers!" was heard. Most of
the time, by their officers' order, the men sat on the ground. One,
having taken off his shako, carefully loosened the gathers of its
lining and drew them tight again; another, rubbing some dry clay
refolded his leg bands and put his boots on again. Some built little
pursuits. When men were killed or wounded, when rows of stretchers
enemy came into view through the smoke, no one paid any attention to
our infantry were seen to move forward, words of approval were heard
on all sides. But the liveliest attention was attracted by occurrences
quite apart from, and unconnected with, the battle. It was as if the
fall.... Ah, they don't see it!" came identical shouts from the
attracted by a small brown dog, coming heaven knows whence, which
trotted in a preoccupied manner in front of the ranks with tail
stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell close by, when it yelped,
tucked its tail between its legs, and darted aside. Yells and
paced up and down from the border of one patch to another, at the edge
of the meadow beside an oatfield, with head bowed and arms behind
his back. There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given.
front, the wounded carried away, and the ranks closed up. If any
soldiers ran to the rear they returned immediately and hastily. At
first Prince Andrew, considering it his duty to rouse the courage of
the men and to set them an example, walked about among the ranks,
but he soon became convinced that this was unnecessary and that
there was nothing he could teach them. All the powers of his soul,
as of every soldier there, were unconsciously bent on avoiding the
meadow, dragging his feet, rustling the grass, and gazing at the
the footprints left on the meadow by the mowers, then he counted his
walk a mile, then he stripped the flowers from the wormwood that
grew along a boundary rut, rubbed them in his palms, and smelled their
pungent, sweetly bitter scent. Nothing remained of the previous
day's thoughts. He thought of nothing. He listened with weary ears
to the ever-recurring sounds, distinguishing the whistle of flying
an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke. "One, another!
gone over. But this one has hit!" And again he started trying to reach
from him, a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared. A chill
ran down his back. Again he glanced at the ranks. Probably many had
been hit--a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion.
"Adjutant!" he shouted. "Order them not to crowd together."
The adjutant, having obeyed this instruction, approached Prince
Andrew. From the other side a battalion commander rode up.
"Look out!" came a frightened cry from a soldier and, like a bird
whirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground, a shell
dropped with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and
reared almost throwing the major, and galloped aside. The horse's
terror infected the men.
"Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.
him and the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the
field and the meadow.
He thought this, and at the same time remembered that people were
looking at him.
"It's shameful, sir!" he said to the adjutant. "What..."
He did not finish speaking. At one and the same moment came the
sound of an explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breaking
was welling out making a large stain on the grass.
officers. Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass,
breathing heavily and noisily.
The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, but
"Pick him up, lift him, it's all the same!" cried someone.
God!"--voices among the officers were heard saying.
The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders, started
hurriedly along the path they had trodden down, to the dressing
station.
"Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!" shouted an officer, seizing by
their shoulders and checking the peasants, who were walking unevenly
"Now that's right!" said the one behind joyfully, when he had got
into step.
"Your excellency! Eh, Prince!" said the trembling voice of Timokhin,
who had run up and was looking down on the stretcher.
eyelids drooped.
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to dressing station by the
pecked the grains that fell. Some crows, scenting blood, flew among
Around the wounded stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with
dismal and attentive faces, whom the officers keeping order tried in
vain to drive from the spot. Disregarding the officers' orders, the
soldiers stood leaning against their stretchers and gazing intently,
as if trying to comprehend the difficult problem of what was taking
plaintive groans. Occasionally dressers ran out to fetch water, or
to point out those who were to be brought in next. The wounded men
awaiting their turn outside the tents groaned, sighed, wept, screamed,
swore, or asked for vodka. Some were delirious. Prince Andrew's
bearers, stepping over the wounded who had not yet been bandaged, took
for a long time could not make out what was going on around him. He
remembered the meadow, the wormwood, the field, the whirling black
ball, and his sudden rush of passionate love of life. Two steps from
noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head. He had been wounded in
the head and leg by bullets. Around him, eagerly listening to his
"We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything, we
grabbed the King himself!" cried he, looking around him with eyes that
there wouldn't have been nothing left of him! I tell you surely..."
there been here? Why was I so reluctant to part with life? There was
CHAPTER XXXVII
holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his
small bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head
evidently wanted a little respite. After turning his head from right
Andrew out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.
Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.
a chance!" remarked one.
just been cleared and which a dresser was washing down. Prince
Andrew could not make out distinctly what was in that tent. The
the whole of the low tent, as a few weeks previously, on that hot
August day, such bodies had filled the dirty pond beside the
sight of which had even then filled him with horror, as by a
presentiment.
There were three operating tables in the tent. Two were occupied,
and on the third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while he
was left alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on
the other two tables. On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a
soldiers were holding him, and a spectacled doctor was cutting into
his muscular brown back.
"Ooh, ooh, ooh!" grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up his
head thrown back. His curly hair, its color, and the shape of his head
seemed strangely familiar to Prince Andrew. Several dressers were
pressing on his chest to hold him down. One large, white, plump leg
twitched rapidly all the time with a feverish tremor. The man was
and trembling--were silently doing something to this man's other, gory
leg. When he had finished with the Tartar, whom they covered with an
overcoat, the spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wiping his
hands.
"Undress him! What are you waiting for?" he cried angrily to the
His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to
hastily to undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. The
Prince Andrew to lose consciousness. When he came to himself the
flesh cut away, and the wound bandaged. Water was being sprinkled on
his face. As soon as Prince Andrew opened his eyes, the doctor bent
over, kissed him silently on the lips, and hurried away.
After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andrew enjoyed a
the best and happiest moments of his life--especially his earliest
leaning over him his nurse sang him to sleep and he, burying his
returned to his memory, not merely as something past but as
something present.
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of
whose head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting him
up and trying to quiet him.
"Show it to me.... Oh, ooh... Oh! Oh, ooh!" his frightened moans
not return, or because he was suffering and others were suffering
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted
blood and with the boot still on.
"Oh! Oh, ooh!" he sobbed, like a woman.
Andrew from seeing his face, moved away.
"My God! What is this? Why is he here?" said Prince Andrew to
In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just been
swollen lips could not grasp its rim. Anatole was sobbing painfully.
connected with me," thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly grasping
what he saw before him. "What is the connection of that man with my
suddenly a new unexpected memory from that realm of pure and loving
childhood presented itself to him. He remembered Natasha as he had
and arms and with a frightened happy face ready for rapture, and
love and tenderness for her, stronger and more vivid than ever,
that filled his swollen eyes. He remembered everything, and ecstatic
"Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and for
remained for me had I lived. But now it is too late. I know it!"
CHAPTER XXXVIII
wounded, together with the heaviness of his head and the news that
some twenty generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded,
and the consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm,
produced an unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to
battlefield overcame that strength of mind which he thought
battlefield and returned to the Shevardino knoll, where he sat on
his campstool, his sallow face swollen and heavy, his eyes dim, his
eyes, to the sounds of firing. With painful dejection he awaited the
end of this action, in which he regarded himself as a participant
brief moment got the better of the artificial phantasm of life he
had served so long. He felt in his own person the sufferings and death
chest reminded him of the possibility of suffering and death for
(what need had he for any more glory?). The one thing he wished for
Semenovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed to him to bring
several batteries of artillery up to those heights to strengthen the
fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo. Napoleon had
assented and had given orders that news should be brought to him of
the effect those batteries produced.
An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns
they still held their ground.
"Our fire is mowing them down by rows, but still they hold on," said
the adjutant.
"Sire?" asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark.
"They want more!" croaked Napoleon frowning. "Let them have it!"
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire, and
him, was being done. And he fell back into that artificial realm of
imaginary greatness, and again--as a horse walking a treadmill
thinks it is doing something for itself--he submissively fulfilled the
cruel, sad, gloomy, and inhuman role predestined for him.
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience
darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening
end of his life could he understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or the
significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and
truth, too remote from everything human, for him ever to be able to
grasp their meaning. He could not disavow his actions, belauded as
Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with
he looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and,
deceiving himself, find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that
superb," because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but even on the
beginning of security. A new horizon and new labors were opening
was already founded; all that remained was to organize it.
stolen from me. In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have
to the peoples as clerk to master.
Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people,
and anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in
the common fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of all
navigable rivers for everybody, that the seas should be common to all,
and that the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to
mere guards for the sovereigns.
magnificent, peaceful, and glorious fatherland, I should have
proclaimed her frontiers immutable; all future wars purely
Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French the
with the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son, to
leisurely visiting, with our own horses and like a true country
couple, every corner of the Empire, receiving complaints, redressing
sides and everywhere.
executioner of the peoples, assured himself that the aim of his
actions had been the peoples' welfare and that he could control the
Bavarians, Wurttembergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, and
Neapolitans. The Imperial army, strictly speaking, was one third
it included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French.
The Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand
the various battles four times more men than the French army; the
burning of Moscow cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who
Moscow to the Oder the Russian army also suffered from the severity of
the season; so that by the the time it reached Vilna it numbered
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will, and the
horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul. He boldly took the
whole responsibility for what happened, and his darkened mind found
justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who
perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians.
CHAPTER XXXIX
various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov
hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino, Gorki, Shevardino, and
Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle. At
the dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a
back to Mozhaysk from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other.
Other crowds, exhausted and hungry, went forward led by their
officers. Others held their ground and continued to fire.
Over the whole field, previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter
of bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun, there now
spread a mist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell of
on the dead and wounded, on the frightened, exhausted, and
hesitating men, as if to say: "Enough, men! Enough! Cease... bethink
To the men of both sides alike, worn out by want of food and rest,
slaughter one another; all the faces expressed hesitation, and the
question arose in every soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill and
be killed?... You may go and kill whom you please, but I don't want to
they were doing and might have thrown up everything and run away
anywhere.
But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the
control them, and they still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed,
and applied the match, though only one artilleryman survived out of
perspiring and stained with blood and powder. The cannon balls flew
effort and the French would be destroyed. But neither the French nor
the Russians made that effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not
attacking the French. At the beginning of the battle they stood
blocking the way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the
battle as at the beginning. But even had the aim of the Russians
been to drive the French from their positions, they could not have
made this last effort, for all the Russian troops had been broken
up, there was no part of the Russian army that had not suffered in the
HALF of their army.
fifteen years, with the assurance of Napoleon's invincibility, with
the consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and
had not been attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain.
Napoleon need only have used his Old Guards, who were intact, and
the battle would have been won. To speak of what would have happened
Guards, not because he did not want to, but because it could not be
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling
of the mighty arm being stricken powerless, but all the generals and
threateningly at the end as at the beginning of the battle. The
moral force of the attacking French army was exhausted. Not that
material fastened to sticks, called standards, and of the ground on
which the troops had stood and were standing, but a moral victory that
convinces the enemy of the moral superiority of his opponent and of
a mortal wound, felt that they were perishing, but could not stop, any
more than the Russian army, weaker by one half, could help swerving.
By impetus gained, the French army was still able to roll forward to
Moscow, but there, without further effort on the part of the Russians,
it had to perish, bleeding from the mortal wound it had received at
Borodino. The direct consequence of the battle of Borodino was
Smolensk road, the destruction of the invading army of five hundred
thousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, on which at
Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger spirit
had been laid.
Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human
mind. Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only
when he examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion; but
at the same time, a large proportion of human error comes from the
arbitrary division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements.
this, that Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was
as the tortoise. By the time Achilles has covered the distance that
separated him from the tortoise, the tortoise has covered one tenth of
that distance ahead of him: when Achilles has covered that tenth,
the tortoise has covered another one hundredth, and so on forever.
motion was arbitrarily divided into discontinuous elements, whereas
the motion both of Achilles and of the tortoise was continuous.
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only
have admitted the conception of the infinitely small, and the
resulting geometrical progression with a common ratio of one tenth,
A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing
complex problems of motion which used to appear insoluble.
dealing with problems of motion admits the conception of the
infinitely small, and so conforms to the chief condition of motion
which the human mind cannot avoid when it deals with separate elements
of motion instead of examining continuous motion.
arbitrary human wills, is continuous.
units. The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily
always flows uninterruptedly from another.
The second method is to consider the actions of some one man--a king
or a commander--as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills;
whereas the sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity
of a single historic personage.
continually takes smaller and smaller units for examination. But
however small the units it takes, we feel that to take any unit
disconnected from others, or to assume a beginning of any
phenomenon, or to say that the will of many men is expressed by the
actions of any one historic personage, is in itself false.
larger or smaller unit as the subject of observation--as criticism has
always be arbitrarily selected.
Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation (the
of these infinitesimals) can we hope to arrive at the laws of history.
present an extraordinary movement of millions of people. Men leave
their customary pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other,
plunder and slaughter one another, triumph and are plunged in despair,
and for some years the whole course of life is altered and presents an
intensive movement which first increases and then slackens. What was
the cause of this movement, by what laws was it governed? asks the
and doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris,
hostile to him; tell of the influence some of these people had on
its laws.
but plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious,
because in it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger.
The sum of human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and
there have been great men," says history. And, indeed, human reason
replies: every time conquerors appear there have been wars, but this
single man. Whenever I look at my watch and its hands point to ten,
I hear the bells of the neighboring church; but because the bells
begin to ring when the hands of the clock reach ten, I have no right
to assume that the movement of the bells is caused by the position
of the hands of the watch.
conclude that the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause of
The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the
winds to blow when the oak buds unfold, I cannot agree with the
peasants that the unfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the cold
wind, for the force of the wind is beyond the influence of the buds. I
phenomena of life, and I see that however much and however carefully I
observe the hands of the watch, and the valves and wheels of the
movement of steam, of the bells, and of the wind. History must do
To study the laws of history we must completely change the subject
in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but it
is evident that only along that path does the possibility of
discovering the laws of history lie, and that as yet not a millionth
part as much mental effort has been applied in this direction by
historians as has been devoted to describing the actions of various
kings, commanders, and ministers and propounding the historians' own
CHAPTER II
The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia. The
and again from Smolensk to Borodino. The French army pushed on to
the earth. Behind it were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken,
hostile country; ahead were a few dozen miles separating it from its
moved on by its own momentum.
The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit of
with another having a greater momentum, and with equal inevitability
the ball of invasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled on
for some distance, though the collision had deprived it of all its
force.
The Russians retreated eighty miles--to beyond Moscow--and the
French reached Moscow and there came to a standstill. For five weeks
after that there was not a single battle. The French did not move.
inert in Moscow for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh
fled still more rapidly back to Smolensk, beyond Smolensk, beyond
On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August, Kutuzov and the
whole Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was a
anyone, but because he knew that the enemy was beaten, as everyone who
had taken part in the battle knew it.
But all that evening and next day reports came in one after
another of unheard-of losses, of the loss of half the army, and a
fresh battle proved physically impossible.
collected, the wounded gathered in, the supplies of ammunition
replace those who had been killed, and before the men had had food and
sleep. And meanwhile, the very next morning after the battle, the
French army advanced of itself upon the Russians, carried forward by
the force of its own momentum now seemingly increased in inverse
proportion to the square of the distance from its aim. Kutuzov's
must also be a possibility of doing it, and that possibility did not
exist. It was impossible not to retreat a day's march, and then in the
same way it was impossible not to retreat another and a third day's
march, and at last, on the first of September when the army drew
near Moscow--despite the strength of the feeling that had arisen in
For people accustomed to think that plans of campaign and battles
may imagine how he would have arranged things in this or that
retreat not do this or that? Why did he not take up a position
before reaching Fili? Why did he not retire at once by the Kaluga
limit the activities of any commander in chief. The activity of a
ourselves when we sit at case in our studies examining some campaign
on the map, with a certain number of troops on this and that side in a
chief is always in the midst of a series of shifting events and so
he never can at any moment consider the whole import of an event
that is occurring. Moment by moment the event is imperceptibly shaping
itself, and at every moment of this continuous, uninterrupted
shaping of events the commander in chief is in the midst of a most
projects, counsels, threats, and deceptions and is continually obliged
to reply to innumerable questions addressed to him, which constantly
Fili, and that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him. But
before him not one proposal but dozens simultaneously. And all these
A commander in chief's business, it would seem, is simply to
choose one of these projects. But even that he cannot do. Events and
gallops up from Miloradovich asking whether he is to engage the French
order to retreat carries us past the turn to the Kaluga road. And
after the adjutant comes the commissary general asking where the
stores are to be taken, and the chief of the hospitals asks where
from the sovereign which does not admit of the possibility of
abandoning Moscow, and the commander in chief's rival, the man who
is undermining him (and there are always not merely one but several
such), presents a new project diametrically opposed to that of turning
to the Kaluga road, and the commander in chief himself needs sleep and
refreshment to maintain his energy and a respectable general who has
been overlooked in the distribution of rewards comes to complain,
contrary to what was said by the officer previously sent; and a spy, a
prisoner, and a general who has been on reconnaissance, all describe
the position of the enemy's army differently. People accustomed to
misunderstand or to forget these inevitable conditions of a
position of the army at Fili and assume that the commander in chief
could, on the first of September, quite freely decide whether to
abandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian army less
question been settled? At Drissa and at Smolensk and most palpably
twenty-sixth at Borodino, and each day and hour and minute of the
retreat from Borodino to Fili.
told the field marshal that it was impossible to fight there before
"Give me your hand," said he and, turning it over so as to feel
the pulse, added: "You are not well, my dear fellow. Think what you
are saying!"
Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond
On the Poklonny Hill, four miles from the Dorogomilov gate of
Moscow, Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the
roadside. A great crowd of generals gathered round him, and Count
the advantages and disadvantages of the position, the state of the
army, the plans suggested, the situation of Moscow, and military
questions generally. Though they had not been summoned for the
was really a council of war. The conversations all dealt with public
questions. If anyone gave or asked for personal news, it was done in a
laughter, or smiles even, were seen among all these men. They
evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the height the
situation demanded. And all these groups, while talking among
themselves, tried to keep near the commander in chief (whose bench
formed the center of the gathering) and to speak so that he might
overhear them. The commander in chief listened to what was being
himself take part in the conversations or express any opinion. After
hearing what was being said by one or other of these groups he
generally turned away with an air of disappointment, as though they
were not speaking of anything he wished to hear. Some discussed the
position that had been chosen, criticizing not the position itself
so much as the mental capacity of those who had chosen it. Others
have been fought two days before. Others again spoke of the battle
a similar manner.) Count Rostopchin was telling a fourth group that he
was prepared to die with the city train bands under the walls of the
left in ignorance of what was happening, and that had he known it
the direction the troops would now have to take. A sixth group was
talking absolute nonsense. Kutuzov's expression grew more and more
preoccupied and gloomy. From all this talk he saw only one thing: that
to defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meaning of
those words, that is to say, so utterly impossible that if any
senseless commander were to give orders to fight, confusion would
result but the battle would still not take place. It would not take
place because the commanders not merely all recognized the position to
be impossible, but in their conversations were only discussing what
commanders lead their troops to a field of battle they considered
(who too reason) also considered the position impossible and therefore
could not go to fight, fully convinced as they were of defeat. If
discussed it, the question was no longer important in itself but
only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue. This Kutuzov knew well.
patriotism (Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincing) by
insisting that Moscow must be defended. His aim was as clear as
Kutuzov who had brought the army as far as the Sparrow Hills without
battle were not given, to clear himself of the crime of abandoning
Moscow. But this intrigue did not now occupy the old man's mind. One
terrible question absorbed him and to that question he heard no
was this terrible affair decided? Moscow must be abandoned. The army
must retreat and the order to do so must be given." To give that
terrible order seemed to him equivalent to resigning the command of
the army. And not only did he love power to which he was accustomed
in Turkey, galled him), but he was convinced that he was destined to
save Russia and that that was why, against the Emperor's wish and by
was convinced that he alone could maintain command of the army in
these difficult circumstances, and that in all the world he alone
horrified at the thought of the order he had to issue. But something
had to be decided, and these conversations around him which were
assuming too free a character must be stopped.
He called the most important generals to him.
"My head, be it good or bad, must depend on itself," said he, rising
the better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov's hut. The men,
granddaughter whom his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he had
generals, who one after another came into the room and sat down on the
which, though it was unbuttoned, still seemed to pinch his neck. Those
who entered went up one by one to the field marshal; he pressed the
moved his hand angrily and Kaysarov understood that his Serene
Highness did not wish his face to be seen.
Round the peasant's deal table, on which lay maps, plans, pencils,
and papers, so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in
another bench and put it beside the table. Ermolov, Kaysarov, and
place, immediately under the icons, sat Barclay de Tolly, his high
round his neck and looked pale and ill. He had been feverish for two
days and was now shivering and in pain. Beside him sat Uvarov, who
with rapid gesticulations was giving him some information, speaking in
attentively with eyebrows raised and arms folded on his stomach. On
at the door with a look of impatience. Konovnitsyn's firm, handsome,
and kindly face was lit up by a tender, sly smile. His glance met
Malasha's, and the expression of his eyes caused the little girl to
deliberations all that time talked in low tones of other matters.
Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his corner
Bennigsen opened the council with the question: "Are we to abandon
frown on every face and only Kutuzov's angry grunts and occasional
cough broke the silence. All eyes were gazing at him. Malasha too
looked at "Granddad." She was nearest to him and saw how his face
puckered; he seemed about to cry, but this did not last long.
the false note in them. "Allow me to tell you, your excellency, that
body forward.) "Such a question cannot be put; it is senseless! The
question I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military
one. The question is that of saving Russia. Is it better to give up
Moscow without a battle, or by accepting battle to risk losing the
The discussion began. Bennigsen did not yet consider his game
at Fili was impossible, but imbued with Russian patriotism and the
love of Moscow, he proposed to move troops from the right to the
left flank during the night and attack the French right flank the
following day. Opinions were divided, and arguments were advanced
for and against that project. Ermolov, Dokhturov, and Raevski agreed
before abandoning the capital or guided by other, personal
considerations, these generals seemed not to understand that this
council could not alter the inevitable course of events and that
eyes fixed on what was going on before her, understood the meaning
of the council differently. It seemed to her that it was only a
personal struggle between "Granddad" and "Long-coat" as she termed
Bennigsen. She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to one
another, and in her heart she sided with "Granddad." In the midst of
the conversation she noticed "Granddad" give Bennigsen a quick, subtle
to "Long-coat" which settled him. Bennigsen suddenly reddened and
paced angrily up and down the room. What so affected him was Kutuzov's
calm and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen's
attack the French right wing.
and military history supports that view. For instance..." Kutuzov
seemed to reflect, searching for an example, then with a clear,
naive look at Bennigsen he added: "Oh yes; take the battle of
not fully successful, only because our troops were rearranged too near
the enemy..."
There followed a momentary pause, which seemed very long to them
The discussion recommenced, but pauses frequently occurred and
they all felt that there was no more to be said.
During one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sigh as if
preparing to speak. They all looked at him.
broken crockery," said he, and rising slowly he moved to the table.
"Gentlemen, I have heard your views. Some of you will not agree with
me. But I," he paused, "by the authority entrusted to me by my
Sovereign and country, order a retreat."
After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity and
circumspect silence of people who are leaving, after a funeral.
Some of the generals, in low tones and in a strain very different
from the way they had spoken during the council, communicated
Malasha, who had long been expected for supper, climbed carefully
projections, and slipping between the legs of the generals she
darted out of the room.
question: "When, when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable?
When was that done which settled the matter? And who was to blame
for it?"
the latter came in late that night. "I did not expect this! I did
not think this would happen."
"You should take some rest, your Serene Highness," replied
"But no! They shall eat horseflesh yet, like the Turks!" exclaimed
retreating without a battle, namely the evacuation and burning of
of that event, acted in an altogether different manner from Kutuzov.
After the battle of Borodino the abandonment and burning of Moscow
was as inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow without
fighting.
Every Russian might have predicted it, not by reasoning but by the
feeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers.
The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all the
strength to find what it should do at that most difficult moment.
And as soon as the enemy drew near the wealthy classes went away
abandoning their property, while the poorer remained and burned and
this, and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken, was present in
Russian Moscow society in 1812. Those who had quitted Moscow already
in July and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this.
Those who went away, taking what they could and abandoning their
save the fatherland and similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively,
simply, organically, and therefore in the way that always produces the
away from Moscow," they were told. In his broadsheets Rostopchin
impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful. They were ashamed
to be called cowards, ashamed to leave, but still they left, knowing
it had to be done. Why did they go? It is impossible to suppose that
Rostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had
remained intact and that during Napoleon's occupation the
charming Frenchmen whom the Russians, and especially the Russian
ladies, then liked so much.
They went away because for Russians there could be no question as to
whether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow. It
was out of the question to be under French rule, it would be the worst
thing that could happen. They went away even before the battle of
Borodino and still more rapidly after it, despite Rostopchin's calls
to defend Moscow or the announcement of his intention to take the
wonder-working icon of the Iberian Mother of God and go to fight, or
were to abandon their property to destruction. They went away
without thinking of the tremendous significance of that immense and
wooden buildings was certain when abandoned by its inhabitants to be
burned. They went away each on his own account, and yet it was only in
consequence of their going away that the momentous event was
accomplished that will always remain the greatest glory of the Russian
people. The lady who, afraid of being stopped by Count Rostopchin's
jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate, with a vague
consciousness that she was not Bonaparte's servant, was really,
simply, and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia.
But Count Rostopchin, who now taunted those who left Moscow and now
had the government offices removed; now distributed quite useless
of saints; now seized all the private carts in Moscow and on one
constructed by Leppich; now hinted that he would burn Moscow and
related how he had set fire to his own house; now wrote a proclamation
to the French solemnly upbraiding them for having destroyed his
all spies and bring them to him, and now reproached them for doing so;
now expelled all the French residents from Moscow, and now allowed
to remain, but ordered the venerable old postmaster Klyucharev to be
arrested and exiled for no particular offense; now assembled the
them, handed over to them a man to be killed and himself drove away by
a back gate; now declared that he would not survive the fall of
in the affair--this man did not understand the meaning of what was
astonish people, to perform some patriotically heroic feat; and like a
child he made sport of the momentous, and unavoidable event--the
abandonment and burning of Moscow--and tried with his puny hand now to
speed and now to stay the enormous, popular tide that bore him along
with it.
CHAPTER VI
found herself in a difficult position.
who occupied one of the highest posts in the Empire. In Vilna she
both claimed their rights. Helene was faced by a new problem--how to
preserve her intimacy with both without offending either.
What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman
did not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova, who
she attempted concealment, or tried to extricate herself from her
awkward position by cunning, she would have spoiled her case by
acknowledging herself guilty. But Helene, like a really great man
correct, as she sincerely believed it to be, and that everyone else
was to blame.
The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach
firmly: "That's just like a man--selfish and cruel! I expected nothing
reward! What right have you, monseigneur, to demand an account of my
interrupted him.
"Well, yes," said she, "it may be that he has other sentiments for
me than those of a father, but that is not a reason for me to shut
my door on him. I am not a man, that I should repay kindness with
expanded bosom and looking up to heaven.
"Marry me, and I will be your slave!"
"But that's impossible."
"You won't deign to demean yourself by marrying me, you..." said
Helene, beginning to cry.
The prince tried to comfort her, but Helene, as if quite distraught,
that there were precedents (there were up to that time very few, but
she mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages), that she
had never been her husband's wife, and that she had been sacrificed.
"But the law, religion..." said the prince, already yielding.
"The law, religion... What have they been invented for if they can't
The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred
to him, and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the
Society of Jesus, with whom he was on intimate terms.
de Jobert, a man no longer young, with snow white hair and brilliant
Sacred Heart, and of the consolations the one true Catholic religion
conscience, but the next evening Monsieur de Jobert came to see Helene
when she was alone, and after that often came again.
*Lay member of the Society of Jesus.
knelt down before the altar to which she was led. The enchanting,
wafted into her soul. It was explained to her that this was la grace.
After that a long-frocked abbe was brought to her. She confessed
to him, and he absolved her from her sins. Next day she received a box
containing the Sacred Host, which was left at her house for her to
partake of. A few days later Helene learned with pleasure that she had
now been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days
document.
attention devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such
pleasant, refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she was
gave her pleasure, but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment
trouble was, after converting her to Catholicism, to obtain money from
before parting with her money insisted that the various operations
necessary to free her from her husband should be performed. In her
view the aim of every religion was merely to preserve certain
proprieties while affording satisfaction to human desires. And with
marriage?
dress, transparent over her shoulders and bosom. The abbe, a
well-fed man with a plump, clean-shaven chin, a pleasant firm mouth,
with a subtle smile on his lips and a peaceful look of delight at
curly hair and his plump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks and every
moment expected the conversation to take a fresh turn. But the abbe,
though he evidently enjoyed the beauty of his companion, was
absorbed in his mastery of the matter.
The course of the Father Confessor's arguments ran as follows:
"Ignorant of the import of what you were undertaking, you made a vow
state without faith in the religious significance of marriage,
significance it should have had. Yet in spite of this your vow was
binding. You swerved from it. What did you commit by so acting? A
intention. If now you married again with the object of bearing
children, your sin might be forgiven. But the question is again a
twofold one: firstly..."
But suddenly Helene, who was getting bored, said with one of her
The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case
presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus' egg. He was
could not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously
"Let us understand one another, Countess," said he with a smile, and
began refuting his spiritual daughter's arguments.
the ecclesiastical point of view, and that her directors were making
difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the
So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of
society. She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him
The elderly magnate was at first as much taken aback by this
suggestion of marriage with a woman whose husband was alive, as the
too. Had Helene herself shown the least sign of hesitation, shame,
or secrecy, her cause would certainly have been lost; but not only did
Petersburg) that both the prince and the magnate had proposed to her
A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg, not that Helene wanted
be regarded at court. There were, it is true, some rigid individuals
unable to rise to the height of such a question, who saw in the
in Helene's good fortune and in the question which match would be
while one had a husband living they did not discuss, for that question
had evidently been settled by people "wiser than you or me," as they
said, and to doubt the correctness of that decision would be to risk
Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, had come to Petersburg that
summer to see one of her sons, allowed herself plainly to express an
stopped her in the middle of the room and, amid general silence,
said in her gruff voice: "So wives of living men have started marrying
again! Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty? You have been
forestalled, my dear! It was thought of long ago. It is done in all
the brothels," and with these words Marya Dmitrievna, turning up her
wide sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly
Petersburg as a buffoon, and so of what she had said they only
noticed, and repeated in a whisper, the one coarse word she had
Prince Vasili, who of late very often forgot what he had said and
repeated one and the same thing a hundred times, remarked to his
aside, drawing her hand downward. "I have heard of certain projects
heart rejoices to know that you... You have suffered so much....
But, my dear child, consult only your own heart. That is all I have to
against his daughter's and move away.
Bilibin, who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly clever
man, and who was one of the disinterested friends so
brilliant a woman as Helene always has--men friends who can never
change into lovers--once gave her his view of the matter at a small
"Listen, Bilibin," said Helene (she always called friends of that
sort by their surnames), and she touched his coat sleeve with her
Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with
a smile on his lips.
"You are not taking me unawares, you know," said he. "As a true
finger, "you forever lose the chance of marrying the other, and you
days happy, and as widow of the Grand... the prince would no longer be
Bilibin's sleeve. "But I love them, you know, and don't want to
distress either of them. I would give my life for the happiness of
them both."
Bilibin shrugged his shoulders, as much as to say that not even he
*A masterly woman.
"But tell me, how will your husband look at the matter?" Bilibin
asked, his reputation being so well established that he did not fear
to ask so naive a question. "Will he agree?"
Helene laughed.
marriage was Helene's mother, Princess Kuragina. She was continually
tormented by jealousy of her daughter, and now that jealousy concerned
text in the Gospel which (as it seemed to him) plainly remarriage
while the husband is alive.
she drove to her daughter's early one morning so as to find her alone.
Having listened to her mother's objections, Helene smiled blandly
and ironically.
"But it says plainly: 'Whosoever shall marry her that is
"Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de betises. Vous ne comprenez rein. Dans ma
position j'ai des devoirs,"* said Helene changing from Russian, in
which language she always felt that her case did not sound quite
clear, into French which suited it better.
In my position I have obligations.
"Oh, Mamma, how is it you don't understand that the Holy Father, who
announce that His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her.
*"No, tell him I don't wish to see him, I am furious with him for
not keeping his word to me."
*"Countess, there is mercy for every sin."
had entered took no notice of her. The princess nodded to her daughter
and sidled out of the room.
is it that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it? Yet it is so
By the beginning of August Helene's affairs were clearly defined and
very much--informing him of her intention to marry N.N. and of her
the formalities necessary for a divorce, which would be explained to
him by the bearer of the letter.
keeping--Your friend Helene.
This letter was brought to Pierre's house when he was on the field
of Borodino.
Toward the end of the battle of Borodino, Pierre, having run down
from Raevski's battery a second time, made his way through a gully
to Knyazkovo with a crowd of soldiers, reached the dressing station,
and seeing blood and hearing cries and groans hurried on, still
entangled in the crowds of soldiers.
The one thing he now desired with his whole soul was to get away
day and return to ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in a
life would he be able to understand himself and all he had seen and
Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road along
which he was going, still on all sides there was what there had been
on the field of battle. There were still the same suffering,
exhausted, and sometimes strangely indifferent faces, the same
which, though distant now, still aroused terror, and besides this
there were the foul air and the dust.
Having gone a couple of miles along the Mozhaysk road, Pierre sat
down by the roadside.
past him in the darkness. He was continually imagining that a cannon
the middle of the night three soldiers, having brought some
firewood, settled down near him and began lighting a fire.
The soldiers, who threw sidelong glances at Pierre, got the fire
to burn and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some
dried bread and put a little dripping. The pleasant odor of greasy
"And who may you be?" one of them suddenly asked Pierre, evidently
meaning what Pierre himself had in mind, namely: "If you want to eat
man."
"I, I..." said Pierre, feeling it necessary to minimize his social
better understood by them. "By rights I am a militia officer, but my
Another shook his head.
"Would you like a little mash?" the first soldier asked, and
Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating the mash, as they
helping himself to large spoonfuls and chewing one after another,
his was lit up by the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence.
"Where have you to go to? Tell us!" said one of them.
"You're a gentleman, aren't you?"
"Yes."
"And what's your name?"
By the time they got near Mozhaysk and began ascending the steep
with the soldiers, quite forgetting that his inn was at the bottom
of the hill and that he had already passed it. He would not soon
not halfway up the hill stumbled upon his groom, who had been to
look for him in the town and was returning to the inn. The groom
recognized Pierre in the darkness by his white hat.
"Your excellency!" he said. "Why, we were beginning to despair!
The soldiers stopped.
"So you've found your folk?" said one of them. "Well, good-by, Peter
Kirilych--isn't it?"
"Good-by, Peter Kirilych!" Pierre heard the other voices repeat.
"I ought to give them something!" he thought, and felt in his
There was not a room to be had at the inn, they were all occupied.
Pierre went out into the yard and, covering himself up head and all,
lay down in his carriage.
Scarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he felt
projectiles, groans and cries, and smelled blood and powder, and a
feeling of horror and dread of death seized him. Filled with fright he
Pierre's head some pigeons, disturbed by the movement he had made in
sitting up, fluttered under the dark roof of the penthouse. The
whole courtyard was permeated by a strong peaceful smell of stable
yards, delightful to Pierre at that moment. He could see the clear
starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses.
They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at the
battery, those who had given him food, and those who had prayed before
out clearly and sharply from everyone else.
"To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thought Pierre as he fell asleep,
what they are. But how cast off all the superfluous, devilish burden
of my outer man? There was a time when I could have done it. I could
have run away from my father, as I wanted to. Or I might have been
sent to serve as a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov." And the
memory of the dinner at the English Club when he had challenged
Dolokhov flashed through Pierre's mind, and then he remembered his
Club and someone near and dear to him sat at the end of the table.
"Yes, that is he! It is my benefactor. But he died!" thought Pierre.
died, and how glad I am that he is alive again!" On one side of the
them (in his dream the category to which these men belonged was as
clearly defined in his mind as the category of those he termed
singing loudly; yet through their shouting the voice of his benefactor
weighty and uninterrupted as the booming on the battlefield, but
pleasant and comforting. Pierre did not understand what his benefactor
distinct in his dream) that he was talking of goodness and the
Wishing to speak and to attract their attention, he got up, but at
that moment his legs grew cold and bare.
cloak Pierre opened his eyes and saw the same penthouse roofs,
posts, and yard, but now they were all bluish, lit up, and
glittering with frost or dew.
hear and understand my benefactor's words." Again he covered himself
there. There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, thoughts
that someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating.
Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced that
think and express his thoughts like that when awake.
"To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man's
freedom to the law of God," the voice had said. "Simplicity is
submission to the will of God; you cannot escape from Him. And they
the unspoken is golden. Man can be master of nothing while he fears
suffering, man would not know his limitations, would not know himself.
The hardest thing [Pierre went on thinking, or hearing, in his
dream] is to be able in your soul to unite the meaning of all. To
unite all?" he asked himself. "No, not to unite. Thoughts cannot be
united, but to harness all these thoughts together is what we need!
with inward rapture, feeling that these words and they alone expressed
what he wanted to say and solved the question that tormented him.
"Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness."
"Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Your
It was the voice of the groom, trying to wake him. The sun shone
straight into Pierre's face. He glanced at the dirty innyard in the
while carts were passing out of the gate. Pierre turned away with
One second more and I should have understood it all! But what am I
to do? Harness, but how can I harness everything?" and Pierre felt
with horror that the meaning of all he had seen and thought in the
dream had been destroyed.
officer had come with news that the French were already near
Mozhaysk and that our men were leaving it.
Pierre got up and, having told them to harness and overtake him,
went on foot through the town.
The troops were moving on, leaving about ten thousand wounded behind
and the streets were crowded with them. In the streets, around carts
that were to take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, and
blows could be heard. Pierre offered the use of his carriage, which
to Moscow. On the way Pierre was told of the death of his
brother-in-law Anatole and of that of Prince Andrew.
On the thirteenth of August Pierre reached Moscow. Close to the
gates of the city he was met by Count Rostopchin's adjutant.
"We have been looking for you everywhere," said the adjutant. "The
count wants to see you particularly. He asks you to come to him at
once on a very important matter."
commander in chief.
Count Rostopchin had only that morning returned to town from his
summer villa at Sokolniki. The anteroom and reception room of his
house were full of officials who had been summoned or had come for
orders. Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count and
explained to him that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it
would have to be surrendered. Though this news was being concealed
from the inhabitants, the officials--the heads of the various
government departments--knew that Moscow would soon be in the
personal responsibility they had all come to the governor to ask how
came out of Rostopchin's private room.
despairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room.
While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched
were there. They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy. Pierre went up to
continued their conversation.
harm, but as things are now one can't answer for anything."
"But you see what he writes..." said another, pointing to a
printed sheet he held in his hand.
"That's another matter. That's necessary for the people," said the
"What is it?" asked Pierre.
"Oh, it's a fresh broadsheet."
His Serene Highness has passed through Mozhaysk in order to join
up with the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong
with ammunition have been sent him from here, and his Serene
Highness says he will defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is
the law courts are closed; things have to be put in order, and we will
deal with villains in our own way! When the time comes I shall want
both town and peasant lads and will raise the cry a day or two
wounded in the Catherine Hospital where we will have some water
"But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in the
"Well, of course! That's what we were saying," replied the first
"And what does he mean by 'One of my eyes was sore but now I am on
"The count had a sty," replied the adjutant smiling, "and was very
Pierre with a smile, "we heard that you have family troubles and
that the countess, your wife..."
you heard?"
"Oh, well, you know people often invent things. I only say what I
heard."
"Well, they say," continued the adjutant with the same smile,
"Possibly," remarked Pierre, looking about him absent-mindedly. "And
who is that?" he asked, indicating a short old man in a clean blue
face.
Vereshchagin. Perhaps you have heard of that affair with the
"Oh, so that is Vereshchagin!" said Pierre, looking at the firm,
"That's not he himself, that's the father of the fellow who wrote
the proclamation," said the adjutant. "The young man is in prison
and I expect it will go hard with him."
wearing a cross round his neck, approached the speaker.
"It's a complicated story, you know," said the adjutant. "That
proclamation appeared about two months ago. The count was informed
of it. He gave orders to investigate the matter. Gabriel Ivanovich
here made the inquiries. The proclamation had passed through exactly
so on till he reached Vereshchagin, a half educated tradesman, you
know, 'a pet of a trader,'" said the adjutant smiling. "They asked
him, 'Who gave it you?' And the point is that we knew whom he had it
wrote it myself.' Well, you know the count," said the adjutant
cheerfully, with a smile of pride, "he flared up dreadfully--and
just think of the fellow's audacity, lying, and obstinacy!"
understand!" said Pierre.
"Not at all," rejoined the adjutant in dismay. "Klyucharev had his
yourself but translated it, and translated it abominably, because
you don't even know French, you fool.' And what do you think? 'No,'
said he, 'I have not read any papers, I made it up myself.' 'If that's
so, you're a traitor and I'll have you tried, and you'll be hanged!
Say from whom you had it.' 'I have seen no papers, I made it up
but the fellow stuck to it. He was sent for trial and condemned to
son, a dandy and lady-killer. He attended some lectures somewhere
fellow he is. His father keeps a cookshop here by the Stone Bridge,
and you know there was a large icon of God Almighty painted with a
CHAPTER XI
In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the
When he entered the private room Count Rostopchin, puckering his
saying something, but when Pierre entered he stopped speaking and went
"Ah, how do you do, great warrior?" said Rostopchin as soon as the
short man had left the room. "We have heard of your prowess. But
about it which he nevertheless intended to pardon. Pierre remained
are Masons and I hope that you are not one of those who
"Yes, I am a Mason," Pierre replied.
"There, you see, mon cher! I expect you know that Messrs.
Speranski and Magnitski have been deported to their proper place.
who on the plea of building up the temple of Solomon have tried to
destroy the temple of their fatherland. You can understand that
there are reasons for this and that I could not have exiled the
Postmaster had he not been a harmful person. It has now come to my
knowledge that you lent him your carriage for his removal from town,
and that you have even accepted papers from him for safe custody. I
like you and don't wish you any harm and--as you are only half my age-
I advise you, as a father would, to cease all communication with men
"But what did Klyucharev do wrong, Count?" asked Pierre.
"That is for me to know, but not for you to ask," shouted
Rostopchin.
proved that he did so," said Pierre without looking at Rostopchin,
"There we are!" Rostopchin shouted at Pierre louder than before,
will be punished as he deserves," said he with the vindictive heat
with which people speak when recalling an insult. "But I did not
summon you to discuss my actions, but to give you advice--or an
nonsense out of anybody"--but probably realizing that he was
added, taking Pierre's hand in a friendly manner, "We are on the eve
cher, what are you doing personally?"
the thoughtful expression of his face.
The count frowned.
"A word of friendly advice, mon cher. Be off as soon as you can,
that's all I have to tell you. Happy he who has ears to hear. Good-by,
my dear fellow. Oh, by the by!" he shouted through the doorway after
of the holy fathers of the Society of Jesus?"
Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchin's room more sullen and
When he reached home it was already getting dark. Some eight
the colonel of his battalion, his steward, his major-domo, and various
petitioners. They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisions
from him. Pierre did not understand and was not interested in any of
these questions and only answered them in order to get rid of these
people. When left alone at last he opened and read his wife's letter.
"They, the soldiers at the battery, Prince Andrew killed... that old
man... Simplicity is submission to God. Suffering is necessary...
married... One must forget and understand..." And going to his bed
he threw himself on it without undressing and immediately fell asleep.
a special messenger, a police officer, had come from Count
Rostopchin to know whether Count Bezukhov had left or was leaving
the drawing room. Pierre dressed hurriedly and, instead of going to
From that time till the end of the destruction of Moscow no one of
Bezukhov's household, despite all the search they made, saw Pierre
again or knew where he was.
CHAPTER XII
The Rostovs remained in Moscow till the first of September, that is,
till the eve of the enemy's entry into the city.
seized with terror. The thought that both her sons were at the war,
clearness. She tried to get Nicholas back and wished to go herself
on active service. Nicholas was somewhere with the army and had not
from Obolenski's regiment to Bezukhov's, which was in training near
places where he could not possibly take part in a battle. As long as
her first-born more than all her other children and even reproached
at lessons, was always breaking things in the house and making himself
eyes and fresh rosy cheeks where soft down was just beginning to show-
in it--then his mother thought she loved him more, much more, than all
her other children. The nearer the time came for Petya to return,
the more uneasy grew the countess. She began to think she would
never live to see such happiness. The presence of Sonya, of her
beloved Natasha, or even of her husband irritated her. "What do I want
with them? I want no one but Petya," she thought.
At the end of August the Rostovs received another letter from
Nicholas. He wrote from the province of Voronezh where he had been
sent to procure remounts, but that letter did not set the countess
anxious about Petya.
Though by the twentieth of August nearly all the Rostovs'
persuade the countess to get away as quickly as possible, she would
not bear of leaving before her treasure, her adored Petya, returned.
officer. Though she concealed from him her intention of keeping him
under her wing, Petya guessed her designs, and instinctively fearing
that he might give way to emotion when with her--might "become
womanish" as he termed it to himself--he treated her coldly, avoided
her, and during his stay in Moscow attached himself exclusively to
tenderness, almost lover-like.
their departure by the twenty-eighth of August and the carts that were
to come from their Ryazan and Moscow estates to remove their household
belongings did not arrive till the thirtieth.
bustle and commotion. Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodino
possessions out by the other gates. In spite of Rostopchin's
broadsheets, or because of them or independently of them, the
said that no one was to be allowed to leave the city, others on the
another battle after Borodino at which the French had been routed,
while others on the contrary reported that the Russian army bad been
destroyed. Some talked about the Moscow militia which, preceded by the
clergy, would go to the Three Hills; others whispered that Augustin
had been forbidden to leave, that traitors had been seized, that the
peasants were rioting and robbing people on their way from Moscow, and
Fili, at which it was decided to abandon Moscow, had not yet been
and that they ought to get away as quickly as possible and save
though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the
be completely upset.
During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the whole
Rostov family was absorbed in various activities. The head of the
family, Count Ilya Rostov, continually drove about the city collecting
the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty
The countess watched the things being packed, was dissatisfied
running away from her, and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spent
getting things packed. But of late Sonya had been particularly sad and
elicited, in her presence, joyous comments from the countess, who
and Nicholas.
"I was never pleased at Bolkonski's engagement to Natasha," said the
a presentiment that it would happen. What a good thing it would be!"
Sonya felt that this was true: that the only possibility of
retrieving the Rostovs' affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman,
and that the princess was a good match. It was very bitter for her.
But despite her grief, or perhaps just because of it, she took on
herself all the difficult work of directing the storing and packing of
the contrary, far from helping their parents, were generally a
nuisance and a hindrance to everyone. Almost all day long the house
resounded with their running feet, their cries, and their
spontaneous laughter. They laughed and were gay not because there
was any reason to laugh, but because gaiety and mirth were in their
hearts and so everything that happened was a cause for gaiety and
because he was at home, because he had left Belaya Tserkov where there
was no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come to Moscow
where there was to be fighting in a few days, and chiefly because
Natasha, whose lead he always followed, was in high spirits. Natasha
of the cause of her sadness, and because she was feeling well. She was
others was a lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make them
run freely--and Petya adored her. Above all, they were gay because
that is always exciting, especially to the young.
CHAPTER XIII
furniture was being carried out or moved about, and the mirrors and
pictures had been taken down. There were trunks in the rooms, and hay,
floors. The yard was crowded with peasant carts, some loaded high
and already corded up, others still empty.
The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasants
The countess had a headache brought on by all the noise and turmoil
and was lying down in the new sitting room with a vinegar compress
army. Sonya was in the ballroom looking after the packing of the glass
with dresses, ribbons, and scarves strewn all about her, gazing
fixedly at the floor and holding in her hands the old ball dress
(already out of fashion) which she had worn at her first Petersburg
ball.
Natasha was ashamed of doing nothing when everyone else was so busy,
and several times that morning had tried to set to work, but her heart
was not in it, and she could not and did not know how to do anything
except with all her heart and all her might. For a while she had stood
beside Sonya while the china was being packed and tried to help, but
soon gave it up and went to her room to pack her own things. At
first she found it amusing to give away dresses and ribbons to the
floor, took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quite
unrelated to what ought to have occupied her thoughts now. She was
(which was theirs) and by the sound of their hurried footsteps going
to the back porch. Natasha got up and looked out of the window. An
enormously long row of carts full of wounded men had stopped in the
street.
The housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, coachmen, maids, footmen,
Natasha, throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and
Natasha moved a few steps forward and stopped shyly, still holding her
"Then you have nobody in Moscow?" she was saying. "You would be more
"I don't know if it would be allowed," replied the officer in a weak
voice. "Here is our commanding officer... ask him," and he pointed
to a stout major who was walking back along the street past the row of
"May the wounded men stay in our house?" she asked.
The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile.
"Which one do you want, Ma'am'selle?" said he, screwing up his
Natasha quietly repeated her question, and her face and whole manner
handkerchief, that the major ceased smiling and after some reflection-
as if considering in how far the thing was possible--replied in the
affirmative.
With a slight inclination of her head, Natasha stepped back
quickly to Mavra Kuzminichna, who stood talking compassionately to the
and dozens of carts with wounded men began at the invitation of the
townsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances of
dealing with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life.
"Your Papa must be told, though," said Mavra Kuzminichna.
"Never mind, never mind, what does it matter? For one day we can
move into the drawing room. They can have all our half of the house."
"There now, young lady, you do take things into your head! Even if
must ask permission."
Natasha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through the
vinegar and Hoffman's drops.
"Are you asleep, Mamma?"
"Oh, what sleep-?" said the countess, waking up just as she was
dropping into a doze.
"Mamma darling!" said Natasha, kneeling by her mother and bringing
her face close to her mother's, "I am sorry, forgive me, I'll never do
brought some wounded here--officers. Will you let them come? They have
one breath.
"What officers? Whom have they brought? I don't understand
In the hall she met her father, who had returned with bad news.
"The Club is closed and the police are leaving."
house?" said Natasha.
"Of course it is," he answered absently. "That's not the point. I
beg you not to indulge in trifles now, but to help to pack, and
servants.
At dinner Petya having returned home told them the news he had
heard. He said the people had been getting arms in the Kremlin, and
that there would be a big battle there.
face as he said this. She realized that if she said a word about his
not going to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the thought of the
there would be no contradicting, and her plans would be spoiled; and
so, hoping to arrange to leave before then and take Petya with her
as their protector and defender, she did not answer him, but after
dinner called the count aside and implored him with tears to take
said that she would die of fright if they did not leave that very
night. Without any pretense she was now afraid of everything.
CHAPTER XIV
countess' fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spirit
been unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of the
shop. She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and the
cabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels
at the drink store, having received orders to do so.
After dinner the whole Rostov household set to work with
enthusiastic haste packing their belongings and preparing for their
departure. The old count, suddenly setting to work, kept passing
from the yard to the house and back again, shouting confused
instructions to the hurrying people, and flurrying them still more.
Natasha, with the ardor characteristic of all she did suddenly set
obedience, grew angry and nearly cried because they did not heed
exploit, which cost her immense effort and established her
china standing on the tables, and still more was being brought in from
the storeroom. A third case was needed and servants had gone to
"Sonya, wait a bit--we'll pack everything into these," said Natasha.
"No, wait a minute, please."
wrapped in paper.
"Oh, wait, please!" And Natasha began rapidly and deftly sorting out
of Kiev ware. "These--yes, these must go among the carpets," she said,
"What a young lady she is!" remarked the major-domo.
But Natasha would not give in. She turned everything out and began
quickly repacking, deciding that the inferior Russian carpets and
unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all. When everything had
been taken out of the cases, they recommenced packing, and it turned
out that when the cheaper things not worth taking had nearly all
been rejected, the valuable ones really did all go into the two cases.
Only the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down. A
assistant and Petya--whom she had drawn into the business of
packing--press on the lid, and made desperate efforts herself.
lasted a moment. She at once set to work afresh and they now trusted
her completely. The count was not angry even when they told him that
Natasha had countermanded an order of his, and the servants now came
on expeditiously, unnecessary things were left, and the most
valuable packed as compactly as possible.
not get everything packed. The countess had fallen asleep and the
count, having put off their departure till next morning, went to bed.
That night another wounded man was driven down the Povarskaya, and
driver sat a venerable old attendant. A doctor and two soldiers
followed the carriage in a cart.
"Please come in here. The masters are going away and the whole house
"Well, perhaps," said he with a sigh. "We don't expect to get him
home alive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it's a long
way from here, and there's nobody living in it."
master's house. Come in," said Mavra Kuzminichna. "Is he very ill?"
she asked.
The attendant made a hopeless gesture.
And the old servant got down from the box and went up to the cart.
"All right!" said the doctor.
The old servant returned to the caleche, looked into it, shook his
head disconsolately, told the driver to turn into the yard, and
stopped beside Mavra Kuzminichna.
"O, Lord Jesus Christ!" she murmured.
She invited them to take the wounded man into the house.
"The masters won't object..." she said.
But they had to avoid carrying the man upstairs, and so they took
him into the wing and put him in the room that had been Madame
Schoss'.
CHAPTER XV
Sunday. The church bells everywhere were ringing for service, just
city.
rabble, that is the poor people, and the price of commodities. An
whom some officials, seminarists, and gentry were mingled, had gone
early that morning to the Three Hills. Having waited there for
of affairs. The price of weapons, of gold, of carts and horses, kept
rising, but the value of paper money and city articles kept falling,
so that by midday there were instances of carters removing valuable
carted, while peasant horses were fetching five hundred rubles each,
and furniture, mirrors, and bronzes were being given away for nothing.
In the Rostovs' staid old-fashioned house the dissolution of
disappeared during the night, but nothing was stolen; and as to the
value of their possessions, the thirty peasant carts that had come
in from their estates and which many people envied proved to be
extremely valuable and they were offered enormous sums of money for
them. Not only were huge sums offered for the horses and carts, but on
the previous evening and early in the morning of the first of
September, orderlies and servants sent by wounded officers came to the
Rostovs' and wounded men dragged themselves there from the Rostovs'
and from neighboring houses where they were accommodated, entreating
the servants to try to get them a lift out of Moscow. The major-domo
to whom these entreaties were addressed, though he was sorry for the
wounded, resolutely refused, saying that he dare not even mention
evident that if they were given one cart there would be no reason to
Thirty carts could not save all the wounded and in the general
thought the major-domo on his master's behalf.
morning, and came out to the porch in his lilac silk dressing gown. In
porch. The major-domo stood at the porch talking to an elderly orderly
the major-domo made a significant and stern gesture to them both to go
away.
willing! What is it, gentlemen?" he added, turning to the officer.
"Are you staying in my house?"
The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson.
"Count, be so good as to allow me... for God's sake, to get into
some corner of one of your carts! I have nothing here with me.... I
shall be all right on a loaded cart..."
Before the officer had finished speaking the orderly made the same
"Oh, yes, yes, yes!" said the count hastily. "I shall be very
pleased, very pleased. Vasilich, you'll see to it. Just unload one
or two carts. Well, what of it... do what's necessary..." said the
count, muttering some indefinite order.
But at the same moment an expression of warm gratitude on the
officer's face had already sealed the order. The count looked around
the count and moving toward the porch.
"Please step into the gallery, your excellency," said the
major-domo. "What are your orders about the pictures?"
The count went into the house with him, repeating his order not to
refuse the wounded who asked for a lift.
"Well, never mind, some of the things can be unloaded," he added
At nine o'clock the countess woke up, and Matrena Timofeevna, who
had been her lady's maid before her marriage and now performed a
sort of chief gendarme's duty for her, came to say that Madame
Schoss was much offended and the young ladies' summer dresses could
Schoss was offended because her trunk had been taken down from its
simplicity of his heart had ordered that they should take with them.
The countess sent for her husband.
"You know, love, I wanted to tell you... Countess dear... an officer
there are officers among them.... You know, I think, my dear... let
them be taken... where's the hurry?"
matters. The countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of
news of something detrimental to the children's interests, such as the
anything announced in that timid tone and considered it her duty to do
She assumed her dolefully submissive manner and said to her husband:
"Listen to me, Count, you have managed matters so that we are
all the children's property! You said yourself that we have a
hundred thousand rubles' worth of things in the house. I don't
consent, my dear, I don't! Do as you please! It's the government's
business to look after the wounded; they know that. Look at the
Lopukhins opposite, they cleared out everything two days ago. That's
what other people do. It's only we who are such fools. If you have
no pity on me, have some for the children."
him into her mother's room.
"Nothing! What business is it of yours?" muttered the count angrily.
"But I heard," said Natasha. "Why does Mamma object?"
"What business is it of yours?" cried the count.
window.
assistant commander of the first division of the Second Army.
He had nothing to do in Moscow, but he had noticed that everyone
in the army was asking for leave to visit Moscow and had something
for family and domestic reasons.
with a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. He
looked attentively at the carts in the yard and while going up to
From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into
the drawing room, where he embraced the count, kissed the hands of
Natasha and Sonya, and hastened to inquire after "Mamma's" health.
"God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland, Papa,"
leaders, so to say, have now assembled in council. No one knows what
spirit, the truly antique valor of the Russian army, which they--which
you, Papa" (he smote himself on the breast as a general he had heard
struck his breast at the words "Russian army"), "I tell you frankly
anything of that kind, could hardly restrain those... those... yes,
those exploits of antique valor," he went on rapidly. "General Barclay
de Tolly risked his life everywhere at the head of the troops, I can
And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales he
confused him, as if she were trying to find in his face the answer
to some question.
cannot be imagined or adequately praised!" said Berg, glancing round
at Natasha, and as if anxious to conciliate her, replying to her
the hearts of her sons!' Isn't it so, Papa?" said he.
Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary
and dissatisfied expression. Berg hurriedly jumped up, kissed her
hand, asked about her health, and, swaying his head from side to
side to express sympathy, remained standing beside her.
"Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad
"I can't think what the servants are about," said the countess,
yet. Somebody after all must see to things. One misses Mitenka at such
times. There won't be any end to it."
The count was about to say something, but evidently restrained
himself. He got up from his chair and went to the door.
At that moment Berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nose
and, seeing the knot in it, pondered, shaking his head sadly and
"Hm..." said the count, and stopped.
"I was driving past Yusupov's house just now," said Berg with a
there is a small chiffonier and a dressing table. You know how dear
Vera wanted a chiffonier like that and how we had a dispute about it."
domestic arrangements.) "And it's such a beauty! It pulls out and
has a secret English drawer, you know! And dear Vera has long wanted
one. I wish to give her a surprise, you see. I saw so many of those
peasant carts in your yard. Please let me have one, I will pay the man
well, and..."
The count frowned and coughed.
"Ask the countess, I don't give orders."
"If it's inconvenient, please don't," said Berg. "Only I so wanted
"Oh, go to the devil, all of you! To the devil, the devil, the
devil..." cried the old count. "My head's in a whirl!"
Natasha left the room with her father and, as if finding it
servants who were to leave Moscow. The loaded carts were still
officer was climbing into one of them helped by an orderly.
"It's because Papa wanted to give up all the carts to the
"I consider," Natasha suddenly almost shouted, turning her angry
face to Petya, "I consider it so horrid, so abominable, so... I
don't know what. Are we despicable Germans?"
and letting the force of her anger run to waste, she turned and rushed
headlong up the stairs.
steps.
"It's horrid! It's abominable!" she screamed. "You can't possibly
Berg and the countess looked at her, perplexed and frightened. The
"Why, the wounded! It's impossible, Mamma. It's monstrous!... No,
Mamma darling, it's not the thing. Please forgive me, darling....
Mamma, what does it matter what we take away? Only look what is
The count stood by the window and listened without turning round.
The countess glanced at her daughter, saw her face full of shame for
not turn to look at her now, and she glanced round quite disconcerted.
"Oh, do as you like! Am I hindering anyone?" she said, not
"My dear, you order what is right.... You know I don't understand
"Papa! Mamma! May I see to it? May I?..." asked Natasha. "We will
still take all the most necessary things."
The count nodded affirmatively, and Natasha, at the rapid pace at
the anteroom and downstairs into the yard.
The servants gathered round Natasha, but could not believe the
strange order she brought them until the count himself, in his
wounded and take the trunks to the storerooms. When they understood
that order the servants set to work at this new task with pleasure and
seemed the only thing that could be done, just as a quarter of an hour
before it had not seemed strange to anyone that the wounded should
be left behind and the goods carted away but that had seemed the
only thing to do.
set eagerly to work at the new task of placing the wounded in the
carts. The wounded dragged themselves out of their rooms and stood
with pale but happy faces round the carts. The news that carts were to
be had spread to the neighboring houses, from which wounded men
began to come into the Rostovs' yard. Many of the wounded asked them
not to unload the carts but only to let them sit on the top of the
things. But the work of unloading, once started, could not be
arrested. It seemed not to matter whether all or only half the
things were left behind. Cases full of china, bronzes, pictures, and
mirrors that had been so carefully packed the night before now lay
possibilities of unloading this or that and letting the wounded have
trap, or else what is to become of them?"
"Let them have my wardrobe cart," said the countess. "Dunyasha can
They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent it to take wounded men from
a house two doors off. The whole household, servants included, was
such as she had not known for a long time.
fix a trunk on the narrow footboard behind a carriage. "We must keep
"Leave it, Vasilich will put it away. It's not wanted."
The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to where
Count Peter could sit.
had to be left behind and making a list of them as the countess
wished, and she tried to get as much taken away with them as possible.
CHAPTER XVII
Before two o'clock in the afternoon the Rostovs' four carriages,
packed full and with the horses harnessed, stood at the front door.
One by one the carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard.
The caleche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted Sonya's
attention as it passed the front porch. With the help of a maid she
stood at the entrance.
"Whose caleche is that?" she inquired, leaning out of the carriage
window.
he spent the night in our house and is going with us."
"But who is it? What's his name?"
"It's our intended that was--Prince Bolkonski himself! They say he
Sonya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess. The countess,
pacing up and down the drawing room, waiting for the household to
assemble for the usual silent prayer with closed doors before
"Mamma," said Sonya, "Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded. He is
The countess opened her eyes in dismay and, seizing Sonya's arm,
glanced around.
At that moment this news had only one significance for both of them.
They knew their Natasha, and alarm as to what would happen if she
heard this news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked.
"Natasha does not know yet, but he is going with us," said Sonya.
"You say he is dying?"
Sonya nodded.
The countess put her arms around Sonya and began to cry.
that was now taking place.
"Well, Mamma? Everything is ready. What's the matter?" asked
start."
And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face.
Sonya embraced Natasha and kissed her.
Natasha looked at her inquiringly.
"Nothing... No..."
"Is it something very bad for me? What is it?" persisted Natasha
with her quick intuition.
Sonya sighed and made no reply. The count, Petya, Madame Schoss,
Mavra Kuzminichna, and Vasilich came into the drawing room and, having
closed the doors, they all sat down and remained for some moments
The count was the first to rise, and with a loud sigh crossed
embraced Mavra Kuzminichna and Vasilich, who were to remain in Moscow,
and while they caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he patted
their backs lightly with some vaguely affectionate and comforting
words. The countess went into the oratory and there Sonya found her on
on the wall. (The most precious ones, with which some family tradition
was connected, were being taken with them.)
In the porch and in the yard the men whom Petya had armed with
with belts and girdles tightened, were taking leave of those remaining
behind.
As is always the case at a departure, much had been forgotten or put
in the wrong place, and for a long time two menservants stood one on
each side of the open door and the carriage steps waiting to help
the countess in, while maids rushed with cushions and bundles from the
house to the carriages, the caleche, the phaeton, and back again.
you know I can't sit like that?"
the seat.
"Oh, those servants!" said the count, swaying his head.
Efim, the old coachman, who was the only one the countess trusted to
glance round at what was going on behind him. From thirty years'
off, in God's name!" would be given him: and he knew that even when it
was said he would be stopped once or twice more while they sent back
would again be stopped and the countess herself would lean out of
down the hill. He knew all this and therefore waited calmly for what
would happen, with more patience than the horses, especially the
near one, the chestnut Falcon, who was pawing the ground and
folded and pulled up, the door was shut, somebody was sent for a
say. Then Efim deliberately doffed his hat and began crossing himself.
God's name!" said Efim, putting on his hat. "Start!" The postilion
started the horses, the off pole horse tugged at his collar, the
high springs creaked, and the body of the coach swayed. The footman
out of the yard onto the uneven roadway; the other vehicles jolted
in their turn, and the procession of carriages moved up the street. In
the carriages, the caleche, and the phaeton, all crossed themselves as
Rarely had Natasha experienced so joyful a feeling as now, sitting
in the carriage beside the countess and gazing at the slowly
receding walls of forsaken, agitated Moscow. Occasionally she leaned
out of the carriage window and looked back and then forward at the
not know who was in it, but each time she looked at the procession her
eyes sought that caleche. She knew it was right in front.
In Kudrino, from the Nikitski, Presnya, and Podnovinsk Streets
came several other trains of vehicles similar to the Rostovs', and
as they passed along the Sadovaya Street the carriages and carts
inquisitively and alertly scrutinizing the people driving or walking
past, suddenly cried out in joyful surprise:
"Dear me! Mamma, Sonya, look, it's he!"
"Who? Who?"
"Look! Yes, on my word, it's Bezukhov!" said Natasha, putting her
arch of the Sukharev tower accompanied by a small, sallow-faced,
"Yes, it really is Bezukhov in a coachman's coat, with a
"No, it's not he. How can you talk such nonsense?"
But the coachman could not stop, for from the Meshchanski Street
came more carts and carriages, and the Rostovs were being shouted at
to move on and not block the way.
In fact, however, though now much farther off than before, the
Rostovs all saw Pierre--or someone extraordinarily like him--in a
coachman's coat, going down the street with head bent and a serious
face beside a small, beardless old man who looked like a footman. That
old man noticed a face thrust out of the carriage window gazing at
them, and respectfully touching Pierre's elbow said something to him
and pointed to the carriage. Pierre, evidently engrossed in thought,
could not at first understand him. At length when he had understood
and looked in the direction the old man indicated, he recognized
Natasha, and following his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly
kindliness.
doing? Why are you like this?"
"What is the matter, Count?" asked the countess in a surprised and
commiserating tone.
"What? What? Why? Don't ask me," said Pierre, and looked round at
Natasha whose radiant, happy expression--of which he was conscious
without looking at her--filled him with enchantment.
Pierre hesitated.
"In Moscow?" he said in a questioning tone. "Yes, in Moscow.
Goodby!"
"Ah, if only I were a man? I'd certainly stay with you. How
but the countess interrupted him.
tomorrow..." he began, but Natasha interrupted him.
"But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not like
"Oh, don't ask me, don't ask me! I don't know myself. Tomorrow...
But no! Good-by, good-by!" he muttered. "It's an awful time!" and
dropping behind the carriage he stepped onto the pavement.
Natasha continued to lean out of the window for a long time, beaming
at him with her kindly, slightly quizzical, happy smile.
CHAPTER XVIII
how it happened.
where he was and what was expected of him. When he was informed that
among others awaiting him in his reception room there was a
Frenchman who had brought a letter from his wife, the Countess Helene,
he felt suddenly overcome by that sense of confusion and
was now at an end, all was in confusion and crumbling to pieces,
that nobody was right or wrong, the future held nothing, and there was
no escape from this position. Smiling unnaturally and muttering to
himself, he first sat down on the sofa in an attitude of despair, then
rose, went to the door of the reception room and peeped through the
crack, returned flourishing his arms, and took up a book. His
major-domo came in a second time to say that the Frenchman who had
brought the letter from the countess was very anxious to see him if
only for a minute, and that someone from Bazdeev's widow had called to
ask Pierre to take charge of her husband's books, as she herself was
"Oh, yes, in a minute; wait... or no! No, of course... go and say
I will come directly," Pierre replied to the major-domo.
But as soon as the man had left the room Pierre took up his hat
which was lying on the table and went out of his study by the other
forehead with both hands, went down as far as the first landing. The
hall porter was standing at the front door. From the landing where
Pierre stood there was a second staircase leading to the back
had seen him. But there were some carriages waiting, and as soon as
Pierre stepped out of the gate the coachmen and the yard porter
noticed him and raised their caps to him. When he felt he was being
looked at he behaved like an ostrich which hides its head in a bush in
order not to be seen: he hung his head and quickening his pace went
Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day the sorting of Joseph
Bazdeev's books and papers appeared to him the most necessary.
He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to the
Patriarch's Ponds, where the widow Bazdeev's house was.
Continually turning round to look at the rows of loaded carts that
his bulky body so as not to slip out of the ramshackle old vehicle,
began to talk to his driver.
Three Hills gates and a great battle would be fought there.
Having reached the Patriarch's Ponds Pierre found the Bazdeevs'
Torzhok five years before with Joseph Bazdeev, came out in answer to
his knock.
"At home?" asked Pierre.
"Owing to the present state of things Sophia Danilovna has gone to
"I will come in all the same, I have to look through the books,"
late master--may the kingdom of heaven be his--has remained here,
but he is in a weak state as you know," said the old servant.
Pierre knew that Makar Alexeevich was Joseph Bazdeev's half-insane
"Yes, yes, I know. Let us go in..." said Pierre and entered the
house.
A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, wearing a dressing gown
Pierre he muttered something angrily and went away along the passage.
"He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as your
nodded. "As it was sealed up so it has remained, but Sophia
have the books."
trepidation in his benefactor's lifetime. The room, dusty and
untouched since the death of Joseph Bazdeev was now even gloomier.
Pierre went round the study, approached the cupboard in which the
manuscripts were kept, and took out what had once been one of the most
important, the holy of holies of the order. This was the authentic
Scotch Acts with Bazdeev's notes and explanations. He sat down at
the dusty writing table, and, having laid the manuscripts before
resting his head on his hand sank into meditation.
Gerasim looked cautiously into the study several times and saw
More than two hours passed and Gerasim took the liberty of making
"Is the cabman to be discharged, your honor?"
down at the old man with moist, shining, and ecstatic eyes, "I say, do
you know that there is going to be a battle tomorrow?"
"We heard so," replied the man.
"I beg you not to tell anyone who I am, and to do what I ask you."
"Yes, your excellency," replied Gerasim. "Will you have something to
eat?"
"No, but I want something else. I want peasant clothes and a
pistol," said Pierre, unexpectedly blushing.
"Yes, your excellency," said Gerasim after thinking for a moment.
All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor's
study, and Gerasim heard him pacing restlessly from one corner to
up for him there.
Gerasim, being a servant who in his time had seen many strange
things, accepted Pierre's taking up his residence in the house without
surprise, and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on. That same
shuffling along in his galoshes as far as the door and stopped and
angry look and hurried away. It was when Pierre (wearing the
coachman's coat which Gerasim had procured for him and had disinfected
CHAPTER XIX
The first troops started at once, and during the night they
nearing the town at the Dorogomilov bridge saw ahead of them masses of
opposite side and blocking the streets and alleys, while endless
masses of troops were bearing down on them from behind, and an
unreasoning hurry and alarm overcame them. They all rushed forward
himself had driven round by side streets to the other side of Moscow.
By ten o'clock in the morning of the second of September, only the
rear guard remained in the Dorogomilov suburb, where they had ample
room. The main army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it.
Napoleon was standing among his troops on the Poklonny Hill looking at
the panorama spread out before him. From the twenty-sixth of August to
entry of the French into Moscow, during the whole of that agitating,
memorable week, there had been the extraordinary autumn weather that
than in spring, when everything shines so brightly in the rare clear
atmosphere that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strengthened and
refreshed by inhaling the aromatic autumn air, when even the nights
The brightness of the morning was magical. Moscow seen from the
and her churches, and she seemed to be living her usual life, her
he had never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather envious
and uneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life that
force of its own life. By the indefinite signs which, even at a
it were, the breathing of that great and beautiful body.
foreigner who sees her, even if ignorant of her significance as the
mother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.
"Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables eglises, Moscou la sainte.
La voila done enfin, cette fameuse ville! Il etait temps,"* said he,
and dismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out before
honor," thought he (he had said so to Tuchkov at Smolensk). From
before. It seemed strange to him that his long-felt wish, which had
seemed unattainable, had at last been realized. In the clear morning
"But could it be otherwise?" he thought. "Here is this capital at my
feet. Where is Alexander now, and of what is he thinking? A strange,
beautiful, and majestic city; and a strange and majestic moment! In
"Here she is, the reward for all those fainthearted men," he
reflected, glancing at those near him and at the troops who were
approaching and forming up. "One word from me, one movement of my
magnanimous and truly great. But no, it can't be true that I am in
with her golden domes and crosses scintillating and twinkling in the
sunshine. But I shall spare her. On the ancient monuments of barbarism
and despotism I will inscribe great words of justice and mercy....
It is just this which Alexander will feel most painfully, I know him."
(It seemed to Napoleon that the chief import of what was taking
place lay in the personal struggle between himself and Alexander.)
"From the height of the Kremlin--yes, there is the Kremlin, yes--I
conqueror with love. I will tell the deputation that I did not, and do
not, desire war, that I have waged war only against the false policy
of their court; that I love and respect Alexander and that in Moscow I
will accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people. I do not
wish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honored monarch.
inspire me, and I shall speak to them as I always do: clearly,
Moscow? Yes, there she lies."
"Qu'on m'amene les boyars,"* said he to his suite.
*"Bring the boyars to me."
A general with a brilliant suite galloped off at once to fetch the
boyars.
Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in the
same place on the Poklonny Hill awaiting the deputation. His speech to
the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination. That
speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.
assemblies at the palace of the Tsars, at which Russian notables and
had to put on a burnoose and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he must
anything sentimental without a reference to ma chere, ma tendre, ma
dedicated to my dear mother." Or no, it should be simply: Maison de ma
Mere,*[2] he concluded. "But am I really in Moscow? Yes, here it
lies before me, but why is the deputation from the city so long in
appearing?" he wondered.
*"My dear, my tender, my poor mother."
Meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on in
whispers among his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite.
Those sent to fetch the deputation had returned with the news that
alarmed by the fact that Moscow had been abandoned by its
inhabitants (grave as that fact seemed), but by the question how to
tell the Emperor--without putting him in the terrible position of
in vain: that there were drunken mobs left in Moscow but no one
together, others disputed that opinion and maintained that the Emperor
should first be carefully and skillfully prepared, and then told the
truth.
The position was the more awkward because the Emperor, meditating
upon his magnanimous plans, was pacing patiently up and down before
the outspread map, occasionally glancing along the road to Moscow from
under his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile.
"But it's impossible..." declared the gentlemen of the suite,
At last the Emperor, tired of futile expectation, his actor's
instinct suggesting to him that the sublime moment having been too
long drawn out was beginning to lose its sublimity, gave a sign with
his hand. A single report of a signaling gun followed, and the troops,
the city through Tver, Kaluga, and Dorogomilov gates. Faster and
faster, vying with one another, they moved at the double or at a trot,
vanishing amid the clouds of dust they raised and making the air
ring with a deafening roar of mingling shouts.
far as the Dorogomilov gate, but there again stopped and,
CHAPTER XX
empty. It was empty in the sense that a dying queenless hive is empty.
it seems as much alive as other hives.
midday sun as gaily as around the living hives; from a distance it
way. But one has only to observe that hive to realize that there is no
longer any life in it. The bees do not fly in the same way, the
smell and the sound that meet the beekeeper are not the same. To the
beekeeper's tap on the wall of the sick hive, instead of the former
of honey and venom, and the warm whiffs of crowded life, comes an odor
no longer sentinels sounding the alarm with their abdomens raised, and
black robber bees smeared with honey fly timidly and shiftily. They do
not sting, but crawl away from danger. Formerly only bees laden with
honey flew into the hive, and they flew out empty; now they fly out
laden. The beekeeper opens the lower part of the hive and peers in.
another's legs and drawing out the wax, with a ceaseless hum of labor-
drowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately in various directions
littered with bits of wax, excrement, dying bees scarcely moving their
legs, and dead ones that have not been cleared away.
The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines the
super. Instead of serried rows of bees sealing up every gap in the
structures of the combs, but no longer in their former state of
stealthily prowling about the combs, and the short home bees,
trying to hinder the robbers, having lost all motive and all sense
against the walls of the hive in their flight. Here and there among
sometimes be heard. Here and there a couple of bees, by force of habit
strength laboriously drag away a dead bee or bumblebee without knowing
why they do it. In another corner two old bees are languidly fighting,
place a crowd of bees, crushing one another, attack some victim and
fight and smother it, and the victim, enfeebled or killed, drops
In place of the former close dark circles formed by thousands of
bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery of generation,
he sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells of bees. They
have almost all died unawares, sitting in the sanctuary they had
guarded and which is now no more. They reek of decay and death. Only a
few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the
enemy's hand, lacking the spirit to die stinging him; the rest are
dead and fall as lightly as fish scales. The beekeeper closes the
hive, chalks a mark on it, and when he has time tears out its contents
and burns it clean.
So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy,
and morose, paced up and down in front of the Kammer-Kollezski
observance of the proprieties--a deputation.
aimlessly moving about, following their old habits and hardly aware of
what they were doing.
empty, he looked angrily at his informant, turned away, and silently
"My carriage!" he said.
the suburb. "Moscow deserted!" he said to himself. "What an incredible
He did not drive into the town, but put up at an inn in the
Dorogomilov suburb.
The coup de theatre had not come off.
the Stone, Moskva, and Yauza bridges.
Kremlin, were thronging the Moskva and the Stone bridges, a great many
soldiers, taking advantage of the stoppage and congestion, turned back
from the bridges and slipped stealthily and silently past the church
of Vasili the Beatified and under the Borovitski gate, back up the
hill to the Red Square where some instinct told them they could easily
no dealers with voices of ingratiating affability inviting customers
without muskets, entering the Bazaar empty-handed and silently
making their way out through its passages with bundles. Tradesmen
and their assistants (of whom there were but few) moved about among
assistants. On the square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating
the muster call. But the roll of the drums did not make the looting
soldiers run in the direction of the drum as formerly, but made
overcoat and on foot, stood at the corner of Ilyinka Street,
talking. A third officer galloped up to them.
"The general orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.
This is outrageous! Half the men have dispersed."
without muskets who, holding up the skirts of their overcoats, were
slipping past him into the Bazaar passage. "Stop, you rascals!"
"But how are you going to stop them?" replied another officer.
"How can one push on? They are stuck there, wedged on the bridge,
from running away?"
"Come, go in there and drive them out!" shouted the senior officer.
The officer in the scarf dismounted, called up a drummer, and went
"Your honor!" said he. "Be so good as to protect us! We won't grudge
trifles, you are welcome to anything--we shall be delighted!
gentleman, or even two pieces with pleasure. For we feel how it is;
but what's all this--sheer robbery! If you please, could not guards be
placed if only to let us close the shop...."
Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer.
"Eh, what twaddle!" said one of them, a thin, stern-looking man.
"When one's head is gone one doesn't weep for one's hair! Take what
any of you like!" And flourishing his arm energetically he turned
sideways to the officer.
"It's all very well for you, Ivan Sidorych, to talk," said the first
tradesman angrily. "Please step inside, your honor!"
a hundred thousand rubles' worth of goods. Can they be saved when
can't fight.'"
"It's not my business!" he exclaimed, and strode on quickly down one
of the passages.
From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, and
just as the officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shaven
This man, bent double, rushed past the tradesman and the officer.
"What is it? What is it?" he asked, but his comrade was already
galloping off past Vasili the Beatified in the direction from which
the screams came.
The officer mounted his horse and rode after him. When he reached
the bridge he saw two unlimbered guns, the infantry crossing the
horses were harnessed. Four borzois with collars were pressing close
the fact that General Ermolov, coming up to the crowd and learning
that soldiers were dispersing among the shops while crowds of
civilians blocked the bridge, had ordered two guns to be unlimbered
another, upsetting carts, and shouting and squeezing desperately,
had cleared off the bridge and the troops were now moving forward.
CHAPTER XXII
Meanwhile, the city itself was deserted. There was hardly anyone
in the streets. The gates and shops were all closed, only here and
heard. The Povarskaya was quite still and deserted. The huge courtyard
of the Rostovs' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dung
from the horses, and not a soul was to be seen there. In the great
drawing room of the house, which had been left with all it
contained, were two people. They were the yard porter Ignat, and the
with satisfaction before the large mirror.
"Isn't it fine, eh, Uncle Ignat?" said the boy, suddenly beginning
to strike the keyboard with both hands.
"Only fancy!" answered Ignat, surprised at the broadening grin on
his face in the mirror.
Vasilich is worn out. Just you wait a bit!"
"I'll give you something gently, you monkey you!" cried Mavra
and with a deep sigh left the drawing room and locked its main door.
next--to drink tea in the servants' wing with Vasilich, or into the
storeroom to put away what still lay about.
open it. Mavra Kuzminichna went to the gate.
"And who are you?"
"An officer, I have to see him," came the reply in a pleasant,
well-bred Russian voice.
the round face of a Rostov, entered the yard.
"They have gone away, sir. Went away yesterday at vespertime,"
The young officer standing in the gateway, as if hesitating
Meanwhile, Mavra Kuzminichna was attentively and sympathetically
examining the familiar Rostov features of the young man's face, his
tattered coat and trodden-down boots.
"What did you want to see the count for?" she asked.
"Oh well... it can't be helped!" said he in a tone of vexation and
placed his hand on the gate as if to leave.
has been very kind to me. As you see" (he glanced with an amused air
out and I have no money, so I was going to ask the count..."
Mavra Kuzminichna did not let him finish.
"Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment," said she.
And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and,
servants' quarters.
While Mavra Kuzminichna was running to her room the officer walked
faint smile on his lips. "What a pity I've missed Uncle! What a nice
the Rogozhski gate?" thought he. Just then Mavra Kuzminichna
While still a few steps from the officer she unfolded the kerchief and
took out of it a white twenty-five-ruble assignat and hastily handed
it to him.
course... but as it is..."
Mavra Kuzminichna grew abashed and confused. The officer did not
apologetically. "Christ be with you, sir! May God preserve you!"
said she, bowing as she saw him out.
bridge to overtake his regiment.
moist eyes, pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpected
which was a dramshop, came drunken shouts and songs. On benches
round the tables in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands.
Tipsy and perspiring, with dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they were
all laboriously singing some song or other. They were singing
discordantly, arduously, and with great effort, evidently not
drunk and on a spree. One, a tall, fair-haired lad in a clean blue
nose would have been handsome had it not been for his thin,
compressed, twitching lips and dull, gloomy, fixed eyes. Evidently
solemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white arm with
his dirty fingers. The sleeve of his coat kept slipping down and he
always carefully rolled it up again with his left hand, as if it
were most important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishing
arm.
And, still rolling up his sleeve, he went out to the porch.
The factory hands followed him. These men, who under the
had had drink served them. The blacksmiths from a neighboring
to have been broken into, wished to force their way in too and a fight
The publican was fighting one of the smiths at the door, and when
the workmen came out the smith, wrenching himself free from the tavern
keeper, fell face downward on the pavement.
Another smith tried to enter the doorway, pressing against the
publican with his chest.
The lad with the turned-up sleeve gave the smith a blow in the
face and cried wildly: "They're fighting us, lads!"
At that moment the first smith got up and, scratching his bruised
face to make it bleed, shouted in a tearful voice: "Police! Murder!...
They've killed a man, lads!"
woman coming out of a gate close by.
A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith.
"Haven't you robbed people enough--taking their last shirts?" said a
voice addressing the publican. "What have you killed a man for, you
The tall lad, standing in the porch, turned his bleared eyes from
the publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he
ought to fight now.
"Murderer!" he shouted suddenly to the publican. "Bind him, lads!"
"I daresay you would like to bind me!" shouted the publican, pushing
away the men advancing on him, and snatching his cap from his head
he flung it on the ground.
"I know the law very well, mates! I'll take the matter to the
captain of police. You think I won't get to him? Robbery is not
permitted to anybody now a days!" shouted the publican, picking up his
"Come along then! Come along then!" the publican and the tall
young fellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up the
The bloodstained smith went beside them. The factory hands and
others followed behind, talking and shouting.
shutters and bearing a bootmaker's signboard, stood a score of thin,
tattered coats.
"But he's sucked our blood and now he thinks he's quit of us. He's
been misleading us all the week and now that he's brought us to this
On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceased
speaking, and with eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined the
moving crowd.
"Where are all the folks going?"
"I say, is it true that we have been beaten?" "And what did you
think? Look what folks are saying."
Questions and answers were heard. The publican, taking advantage
of the increased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.
The tall youth, not noticing the disappearance of his foe, waved his
bare arm and went on talking incessantly, attracting general attention
to himself. It was around him that the people chiefly crowded,
"He must keep order, keep the law, that's what the government is
there for. Am I not right, good Christians?" said the tall youth, with
a scarcely perceptible smile. "He thinks there's no government! How
can one do without government? Or else there would be plenty who'd rob
us."
up Moscow like this? They told you that for fun, and you believed
That's what the government is for. You'd better listen to what
people are saying," said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth.
voices in the crowd, and the people rushed toward the reader.
When the crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at the
rather tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning.
("Sirin Highness," said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his
lips and a frown on his brow), "to consult with him to act, and to aid
the army to exterminate these scoundrels. We too will take part..."
the reader went on, and then paused ("Do you see," shouted the youth
victoriously, "he's going to clear up the whole affair for
you...."), "in destroying them, and will send these visitors to the
devil. I will come back to dinner, and we'll set to work. We will
do, completely do, and undo these scoundrels."
The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence. The
tall lad hung his head gloomily. It was evident that no one had
to dinner," evidently displeased both reader and audience. The
and needlessly comprehensible--it was what any one of them might
authority should not say.
They all stood despondent and silent. The tall youth moved his
"We should ask him... that's he himself?"... "Yes, ask him
indeed!... Why not? He'll explain"... voices in the rear of the
attended by two mounted dragoons.
matter acquired a large sum of money which was at that moment in his
pocket, on seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told his coachman to
stop.
"What people are these?" he shouted to the men, who were moving
singly and timidly in the direction of his trap.
"What people are these?" he shouted again, receiving no answer.
"Your honor..." replied the shopman in the frieze coat, "your honor,
in accord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count,
kind of riot, but as his highest excellence said..."
superintendent had said, and looking at the departing trap.
The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a
scared look, said something to his coachman, and his horses
"It's a fraud, lads! Lead the way to him, himself!" shouted the tall
Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the
crowd went in the direction of the Lubyanka Street.
"There now, the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us to
saying more and more frequently.
CHAPTER XXIV
and its patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite
surprised by all this, Rostopchin had returned to Moscow. After supper
letter requested the count to send police officers to guide the troops
Moscow. This was not news to Rostopchin. He had known that Moscow
would be abandoned not merely since his interview the previous day
Borodino, for all the generals who came to Moscow after that battle
had said unanimously that it was impossible to fight another battle,
and since then the government property had been removed every night,
and half the inhabitants had left the city with Rostopchin's own
from Kutuzov, and received at night, breaking in on his beauty sleep.
actions at this time, he repeatedly says that he was then actuated
by two important considerations: to maintain tranquillity in Moscow
and expedite the departure of the inhabitants. If one accepts this
twofold aim all Rostopchin's actions appear irreproachable. "Why
were the holy relics, the arms, ammunition, gunpowder, and stores of
corn not removed? Why were thousands of inhabitants deceived into
"To presence the tranquillity of the city," explains Count Rostopchin.
Leppich's balloon and other articles removed?" "To leave the town
tranquillity is in danger and any action finds a justification.
On what, then, was Count Rostopchin's fear for the tranquillity of
the masses to riot?
Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling
ten thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second of
September, and except for a mob in the governor's courtyard, assembled
there at his bidding, nothing happened. It is obvious that there would
have been even less reason to expect a disturbance among the people if
certain or at least probable, Rostopchin instead of exciting the
remove all the holy relics, the gunpowder, munitions, and money, and
had told the population plainly that the town would be abandoned.
Rostopchin, though he had patriotic sentiments, was a sanguine and
impulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrative
himself to be guiding. Ever since the enemy's entry into Smolensk he
all administrators) that he controlled the external actions of
attitude by means of his broadsheets and posters, written in a
coarse tone which the people despise in their own class and do not
understand from those in authority. Rostopchin was so pleased with the
fine role of leader of popular feeling, and had grown so used to it,
the ground slip away from under his feet, so that he positively did
not know what to do. Though he knew it was coming, he did not till the
did not prepare for it. The inhabitants left against his wishes. If
the government offices were removed, this was only done on the
absorbed in the role he had created for himself. As is often the
intellect, he did not believe it in his heart and did not adapt
himself mentally to this new position of affairs.
All his painstaking and energetic activity (in how far it was useful
and had any effect on the people is another question) had been
patriotic hatred of the French.
But when events assumed their true historical character, when
before Moscow, when the whole population streamed out of Moscow as one
man, abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative action
all the depth of their national feeling, then the role chosen by
Rostopchin suddenly appeared senseless. He unexpectedly felt himself
When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptory
note from Kutuzov, he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself
to blame. All that he had been specially put in charge of, the state
ruminated. "Not I, of course. I had everything ready. I had Moscow
firmly in hand. And this is what they have let it come to! Villains!
they might be who were to blame for the false and ridiculous
All that night Count Rostopchin issued orders, for which people came
"Your excellency, the Director of the Registrar's Department has
asking for information.... What are your orders about the Fire
the lunatic asylum..." All night long such announcements were
continually being received by the count.
carefully prepared by him, had now been ruined by somebody, and that
that somebody would have to bear the whole responsibility for all that
"Oh, tell that blockhead," he said in reply to the question from the
Registrar's Department, "that he should remain to guard his documents.
Now why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade? They
have horses, let them be off to Vladimir, and not leave them to the
French."
"Your excellency, the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come:
lunatics out into the town. When lunatics command our armies God
In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison, Count
for a convoy? Release them, that's all about it!"
Vereshchagin..."
"Bring him to me!"
CHAPTER XXV
Toward nine o'clock in the morning, when the troops were already
moving through Moscow, nobody came to the count any more for
instructions. Those who were able to get away were going of their
own accord, those who remained behind decided for themselves what they
must do.
The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sokolniki, and
sat in his study with folded hands, morose, sallow, and taciturn.
it is only by his efforts that the whole population under his rule
is kept going, and in this consciousness of being indispensable
frail bark, holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the people
and himself moving, naturally imagines that his efforts move the
ship he is holding on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea
begins to heave and the ship to move, such a delusion is no longer
possible. The ship moves independently with its own enormous motion,
becomes an insignificant, useless, feeble man.
Rostopchin felt this, and it was this which exasperated him.
The superintendent of police, whom the crowd had stopped, went in to
see him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that
the horses were harnessed. They were both pale, and the superintendent
of police, after reporting that he had executed the instructions he
Without saying a word Rostopchin rose and walked hastily to his
light, luxurious drawing room, went to the balcony door, took hold
front, flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look. The
"Is my carriage ready?" asked Rostopchin, stepping back from the
window.
"It is, your excellency," replied the adjutant.
Rostopchin went again to the balcony door.
"But what do they want?" he asked the superintendent of police.
orders, to go against the French, and they shouted something about
treachery. But it is a turbulent crowd, your excellency--I hardly
Rostopchin angrily.
done with me!" thought he, full of an irrepressible fury that welled
be attributed. As often happens with passionate people, he was
victim," he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his
arm. And this thought occurred to him just because he himself
desired a victim, something on which to vent his rage.
"Is the carriage ready?" he asked again.
"Yes, your excellency. What are your orders about Vereshchagin? He
"Ah!" exclaimed Rostopchin, as if struck by an unexpected
recollection.
And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the
and all eyes were raised to the count.
settle with the villain. We must punish the villain who has caused the
ruin of Moscow. Wait for me!"
And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammed
A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd.
"He'll settle with all the villains, you'll see! And you said the
French... He'll show you what law is!" the mob were saying as if
A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door,
"Where is he?" he inquired. And as he spoke he saw a young man
long thin neck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was again
covered by short hair. This young man was dressed in a threadbare blue
cloth coat lined with fox fur, that had once been smart, and dirty
hempen convict trousers, over which were pulled his thin, dirty,
trodden-down boots. On his thin, weak legs were heavy chains which
hampered his irresolute movements.
young man in the fur-lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of the
porch. "Put him there."
spot indicated, holding away with one finger the coat collar which
chafed his neck, turned his long neck twice this way and that, sighed,
the step the silence continued. Only among the back rows of the
people, who were all pressing toward the one spot, could sighs,
groans, and the shuffling of feet be heard.
While waiting for the young man to take his place on the step
"Lads!" said he, with a metallic ring in his voice. "This man,
Vereshchagin, is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing."
The young man in the fur-lined coat, stooping a little, stood in a
submissive attitude, his fingers clasped before him. His emaciated
young face, disfigured by the half-shaven head, hung down
hopelessly. At the count's first words he raised it slowly and
long thin neck swelled like a cord and went blue behind the ear, and
suddenly his face flushed.
All eyes were fixed on him. He looked at the crowd, and rendered
more hopeful by the expression he read on the faces there, he smiled
sadly and timidly, and lowering his head shifted his feet on the step.
"He has betrayed his Tsar and his country, he had gone over to
Bonaparte. He alone of all the Russians has disgraced the Russian
even voice, but suddenly he glanced down at Vereshchagin who continued
to stand in the same submissive attitude. As if inflamed by the sight,
"Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him over to you."
The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer to
standing in front, who had seen and heard what had taken place
before them, all stood with wide open eyes and mouths, straining
behind them.
"Beat him!... Let the traitor perish and not disgrace the Russian
name!" shouted Rostopchin. "Cut him down. I command it."
Hearing not so much the words as the angry tone of Rostopchin's
"Count!" exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshchagin in
above us both...." He lifted his head and again the thick vein in
"Cut him down! I command it..." shouted Rostopchin, suddenly growing
pale like Vereshchagin.
the front ranks carried it swaying to the very steps of the porch. The
And one of the soldiers, his face all at once distorted with fury,
struck Vereshchagin on the head with the blunt side of his saber.
exclaimed a sorrowful voice.
But after the exclamation of surprise that had escaped from
fatal. The barrier of human feeling, strained to the utmost, that
had held the crowd in check suddenly broke. The crime had begun and
the threatening and angry roar of the crowd. Like the seventh and last
engulfing them all. The dragoon was about to repeat his blow.
Vereshchagin with a cry of horror, covering his head with his hands,
rushed toward the crowd. The tall youth, against whom he stumbled,
under the feet of the pressing, struggling crowd.
Some beat and tore at Vereshchagin, others at the tall youth. And
tried to rescue the tall lad only increased the fury of the crowd.
youth, beaten almost to death. And for a long time, despite the
Vereshchagin were unable to kill him, for the crowd pressed from all
sides, swaying as one mass with them in the center and rendering it
impossible for them either to kill him or let him go.
"Hit him with an ax, eh!... Crushed?... Traitor, he sold
serves a thief right. Use the hatchet!... What--still alive?"
Only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to a
long-drawn, measured death rattle did the crowd around his
prostrate, bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change places. Each one
came up, glanced at what had been done, and with horror, reproach, and
"O Lord! The people are like wild beasts! How could he be alive?"
too... must have been a merchant's son. What men!... and they say he's
another has been beaten too--they say he's nearly done for.... Oh, the
people... Aren't they afraid of sinning?..." said the same mob now,
half-severed neck and its livid face stained with blood and dust.
away. Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it
At the moment when Vereshchagin fell and the crowd closed in with
savage yells and swayed about him, Rostopchin suddenly turned pale
and, instead of going to the back entrance where his carriage
awaited him, went with hurried steps and bent head, not knowing
where and why, along the passage leading to the rooms on the ground
floor. The count's face was white and he could not control the
please..." said a trembling, frightened voice behind him.
Count Rostopchin was unable to reply and, turning obediently, went
The distant roar of the yelling crowd was audible even there. He
hastily took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his
When they reached the Myasnitski Street and could no longer hear the
shouts of the mob, the count began to repent. He remembered with
French. "They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease."
recurred to him, and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back. But this
disdainfully at himself. "I had other duties," thought he. "The people
had to be appeased. Many other victims have perished and are perishing
for the public good"--and he began thinking of his social duties to
Vasilyevich Rostopchin was sacrificing himself for the public good)
would have been quite different, but it was my duty to safeguard my
life and dignity as commander in chief."
Lightly swaying on the flexible springs of his carriage and no
longer hearing the terrible sounds of the crowd, Rostopchin grew
physically tranquil his mind devised reasons why he should be mentally
one. Since the world began and men have killed one another no one
has ever committed such a crime against his fellow man without
the hypothetical welfare of other people.
And Rostopchin now knew it.
Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done, but
he even found cause for self-satisfaction in having so successfully
contrived to avail himself of a convenient opportunity to punish a
Rostopchin (though the Senate had only condemned Vereshchagin to
hard labor), "he was a traitor and a spy. I could not let him go
unpunished and so I have killed two birds with one stone: to appease
Having reached his country house and begun to give orders about
Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across the
Sokolniki field, no longer thinking of what had occurred but
considering what was to come. He was driving to the Yauza bridge where
he had heard that Kutuzov was. Count Rostopchin was mentally preparing
the angry and stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutuzov for
his deception. He would make that foxy old courtier feel that the
abandonment of the city and the ruin of Russia (as Rostopchin regarded
it) would fall upon his doting old head. Planning beforehand what he
would say to Kutuzov, Rostopchin turned angrily in his caleche and
the almshouse and the lunatic asylum, could be seen some people in
white and others like them walking singly across the field shouting
and gesticulating.
with vague horror and curiosity at these released lunatics and
Swaying from side to side on his long, thin legs in his fluttering
him to stop. The lunatic's solemn, gloomy face was thin and yellow,
with its beard growing in uneven tufts. His black, agate pupils with
saffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids.
"Stop! Pull up, I tell you!" he cried in a piercing voice, and again
Coming abreast of the caleche he ran beside it.
They stoned me, crucified me... I shall rise... shall rise... shall
raising his voice higher and higher.
Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd
cried in a trembling voice to his coachman. The caleche flew over
fainter in the distance, while his eyes saw nothing but the
astonished, frightened, bloodstained face of "the traitor" in the
had cut deep into his heart and drawn blood. Even now he felt
clearly that the gory trace of that recollection would not pass with
would have happened." He saw the frightened and then infuriated face
of the dragoon who dealt the blow, the look of silent, timid
reproach that boy in the fur-lined coat had turned upon him. "But I
did not do it for my own sake. I was bound to act that way.... The
mob, the traitor... the public welfare," thought he.
Troops were still crowding at the Yauza bridge. It was hot. Kutuzov,
whip in the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily. A man in a
general's uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutuzov and said
something in French. It was Count Rostopchin. He told Kutuzov that
remained.
Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if, not grasping what was said to
him, he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment
penetrating gaze from Rostopchin's face muttered softly:
"No! I shall not give up Moscow without a battle!"
Whether Kutuzov was thinking of something entirely different when he
spoke those words, or uttered them purposely, knowing them to be
him. And strange to say, the Governor of Moscow, the proud Count
Rostopchin, took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where he
began with shouts to drive on the carts that blocked the way.
CHAPTER XXVI
Toward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat's troops were entering
Moscow. In front rode a detachment of Wurttemberg hussars and behind
advanced detachment as to the condition in which they had found the
They all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-haired
heard saying.
An interpreter rode up to the group.
another in the crowd. The interpreter addressed an old porter and
asked if it was far to the Kremlin. The porter, listening in
the interpreter was speaking Russian, did not understand what was
Russian army was. One of the Russians understood what was asked and
officer, returning from the advanced detachment, rode up to Murat
and reported that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and
"Good!" said Murat and, turning to one of the gentlemen in his
gates.
advanced up the Arbat. When they reached the end of the Vozdvizhenka
Street they halted and drew in the Square. Several French officers
superintended the placing of the guns and looked at the Kremlin
The bells in the Kremlin were ringing for vespers, and this sound
troubled the French. They imagined it to be a call to arms. A few
infantrymen ran to the Kutafyev Gate. Beams and wooden screens had
been put there, and two musket shots rang out from under the gate as
soon as an officer and men began to run toward it. A general who was
standing by the guns shouted some words of command to the officer, and
the latter ran back again with his men.
The sound of three more shots came from the gate.
One shot struck a French soldier's foot, and from behind the screens
word of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of
concentrated readiness for strife and suffering. To all of them from
in Moscow), but a new battlefield which would probably prove
sanguinary. And all made ready for that battle. The cries from the
gates ceased. The guns were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ash
followed by two whistling sounds of canister shot, one after
wooden beams and screens, and two wavering clouds of smoke rose over
the Square.
stone-built Kremlin had died away the French heard a strange sound
above their head. Thousands of crows rose above the walls and
circled in the air, cawing and noisily flapping their wings.
Together with that sound came a solitary human cry from the gateway
"Fire!" repeated the officer once more, and the reports of a musket
and of two cannon shots were heard simultaneously. The gate again
Nothing more stirred behind the screens and the French infantry
wounded and four dead. Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot
Who these men were nobody knew. "Clear that away!" was all that
was said of them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removed
later on that they might not stink. Thiers alone dedicates a few
eloquent lines to their memory: "These wretches had occupied the
sacred citadel, having supplied themselves with guns from the arsenal,
and fired" (the wretches) "at the French. Some of them were sabered
Murat was informed that the way had been cleared. The French entered
the gates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square. Out of
the windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the
Other detachments passed through the Kremlin and encamped along
the Moroseyka, the Lubyanka, and Pokrovka Streets. Others quartered
were not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in
original number, the French entered Moscow in good marching order.
It was a weary and famished, but still a fighting and menacing army.
army was lost forever and there came into being something nondescript,
five weeks later these same men left Moscow, they no longer formed
articles which seemed to him valuable or useful. The aim of each man
when he left Moscow was no longer, as it had been, to conquer, but
merely to keep what he had acquired. Like a monkey which puts its
paw into the narrow neck of a jug, and having seized a handful of nuts
will not open its fist for fear of losing what it holds, and therefore
perishes, the French when they left Moscow had inevitably to perish
because they carried their loot with them, yet to abandon what they
had stolen was as impossible for them as it is for the monkey to
open its paw and let go of its nuts. Ten minutes after each regiment
Men in military uniforms and Hessian boots could be seen through the
windows, laughing and walking through the rooms. In cellars and
lighting fires in kitchens and kneading and baking bread with
any violence to the inhabitants or any looting, and announcing a
men, who had till then constituted an army, flowed all over the
wealthy, deserted city with its comforts and plentiful supplies. As
a hungry herd of cattle keeps well together when crossing a barren
field, but gets out of hand and at once disperses uncontrollably as
the wealthy city.
percolating through sand--spread irresistibly through the city in
them appropriated several houses, chalked their names on them, and
quarreled and even fought with other companies for them. Before they
streets to see the city and, hearing that everything had been
abandoned, rushed to places where valuables were to be had for the
taking. The officers followed to check the soldiers and were
involuntarily drawn into doing the same. In Carriage Row carriages had
been left in the shops, and generals flocked there to select
caleches and coaches for themselves. The few inhabitants who had
remained invited commanding officers to their houses, hoping thereby
to secure themselves from being plundered. There were masses of wealth
the army ever deeper and deeper. When water is spilled on dry ground
both the dry ground and the water disappear and mud results; and in
the same way the entry of the famished army into the rich and deserted
city resulted in fires and looting and the destruction of both the
army and the wealthy city.
The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme feroce de
however, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burning
position in which any town built of wood was bound to burn, quite
apart from whether it had, or had not, a hundred and thirty inferior
fire engines. Deserted Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of
shavings has to burn on which sparks continually fall for several
days. A town built of wood, where scarcely a day passes without
force is present, cannot help burning when its inhabitants have left
it and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke pipes, make campfires of
twice a day. In peacetime it is only necessary to billet troops in the
villages of any district and the number of fires in that district
increased in an abandoned, wooden town where foreign troops are
quartered. "Le patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine" and the barbarity of
the French were not to blame in the matter. Moscow was set on fire
if there was any arson (which is very doubtful, for no one had any
reason to burn the houses--in any case a troublesome and dangerous
thing to do), arson cannot be regarded as the cause, for the same
thing would have happened without any incendiarism.
*To Rostopchin's ferocious patriotism.
on to place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people, it is
the fire, for Moscow had to burn as every village, factory, or house
allowed to live and cook their porridge. Moscow was burned by its
salt, nor bring them the keys of the city.
CHAPTER XXVII
The absorption of the French by Moscow, radiating starwise as it
did, only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by the
Pierre was in a state bordering on insanity. He was completely
obsessed by one persistent thought. He did not know how or when this
the past, understood nothing of the present, and all he saw and
demands that enmeshed him, and which in his present condition he was
Alexeevich was connected with a world of eternal, solemn, and calm
thoughts, quite contrary to the restless confusion into which he
felt himself being drawn. He sought a quiet refuge, and in Joseph
Alexeevich's study he really found it. When he sat with his elbows
on the dusty writing table in the deathlike stillness of the study,
calm and significant memories of the last few days rose one after
with the truth, simplicity, and strength of the class of men he
which he knew was projected. And with that object he had asked Gerasim
to get him a peasant's coat and a pistol, confiding to him his
intentions of remaining in Joseph Alexeevich's house and keeping his
name secret. Then during the first day spent in inaction and
manuscripts, but was unable to do so) the idea that had previously
occurred to him of the cabalistic significance of his name in
But the idea that he, L'russe Besuhof, was destined to set a limit
to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies that
When, having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part
among the people in the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met the
Moscow?... How splendid!" the thought flashed into his mind that it
Next day, with the sole idea of not sparing himself and not
But when he returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be
defended, he suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a
kill him, and either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe-
which it seemed to him was solely due to Napoleon.
Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte's life in
1809 by a German student in Vienna, and knew that the student had been
shot. And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying out
his design excited him still more.
Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to this
purpose. The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and
to the very thick of the battle and had now caused him to run away
from his home and, in place of the luxury and comfort to which he
was accustomed, to sleep on a hard sofa without undressing and eat the
same food as Gerasim. The other was that vague and quite Russian
feeling of contempt for everything conventional, artificial, and
human--for everything the majority of men regard as the greatest
and guard--if it has any worth has so only by reason the joy with
It was the feeling that induces a volunteer recruit to spend his
he possesses: the feeling which causes a man to perform actions
were, his personal power and strength, affirming the existence of a
higher, nonhuman criterion of life.
From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for the
first time at the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under its
this moment Pierre was supported in his design and prevented from
renouncing it by what he had already done in that direction. If he
were now to leave Moscow like everyone else, his flight from home, the
peasant coat, the pistol, and his announcement to the Rostovs that
sensitive.
Pierre's physical condition, as is always the case, corresponded
drank during those days, the absence of wine and cigars, his dirty
unchanged linen, two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa
bordering on insanity.
entered Moscow. Pierre knew this, but instead of acting he only
thought about his undertaking, going over its minutest details in
his mind. In his fancy he did not clearly picture to himself either
the striking of the blow or the death of Napoleon, but with
extraordinary vividness and melancholy enjoyment imagined his own
destruction and heroic endurance.
"Yes, alone, for the sake of all, I must do it or perish!" he
thought. "Yes, I will approach... and then suddenly... with pistol
or dagger? But that is all the same! 'It is not I but the hand of
Providence that punishes thee,' I shall say," thought he, imagining
execute me!" he went on, speaking to himself and bowing his head
with a sad but firm expression.
himself in this way, the study door opened and on the threshold
now quite transformed.
His dressing gown was unfastened, his face red and distorted. He was
noticing embarrassment on Pierre's face immediately grew bold and,
staggering on his thin legs, advanced into the middle of the room.
He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized it
Gerasim and the porter, who had followed Makar Alexeevich, stopped
him in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him. Pierre,
coming out into the corridor, looked with pity and repulsion at the
on to the pistol and screamed hoarsely, evidently with some heroic
"To arms! Board them! No, you shan't get it," he yelled.
"That will do, please, that will do. Have the goodness--please, sir,
steer Makar Alexeevich by the elbows back to the door.
"Who are you? Bonaparte!..." shouted Makar Alexeevich.
"That's not right, sir. Come to your room, please, and rest. Allow
"Be off, thou base slave! Touch me not! See this?" shouted Makar
Alexeevich, brandishing the pistol. "Board them!"
"Catch hold!" whispered Gerasim to the porter.
They seized Makar Alexeevich by the arms and dragged him to the
The vestibule was filled with the discordant sounds of a struggle
Suddenly a fresh sound, a piercing feminine scream, reverberated
"It's them! Gracious heavens! O Lord, four of them, horsemen!" she
cried.
silent corridor the sound of several hands knocking at the front
door could be heard.
CHAPTER XXVIII
would disclose neither his identity nor his knowledge of French, stood
at the half-open door of the corridor, intending to conceal himself as
soon as the French entered. But the French entered and still Pierre
did not retire--an irresistible curiosity kept him there.
handsome man--the other evidently a private or an orderly,
sunburned, short, and thin, with sunken cheeks and a dull
having apparently decided that these were good quarters, turned
mustache and lightly touched his hat.
"Bonjour, la compagnie!"* said he gaily, smiling and looking about
No one gave any reply.
"Vous etes le bourgeois?"* the officer asked Gerasim.
"Quartier, quartier, logement!" said the officer, looking down at
pas, mon vieux!"* added he, clapping the scared and silent Gerasim
establishment?" he asked again in French, looking around and meeting
Pierre's eyes. Pierre moved away from the door.
the devil! There, don't let us be cross, old fellow!"
Again the officer turned to Gerasim and asked him to show him the
"Master, not here--don't understand... me, you..." said Gerasim,
Gerasim's nose, intimating that he did not understand him either,
and moved, limping, to the door at which Pierre was standing. Pierre
wished to go away and conceal himself, but at that moment he saw Makar
Alexeevich appearing at the open kitchen door with the pistol in his
raised his pistol, and took aim.
Hearing the yell the officer turned round, and at the same moment
Pierre threw himself on the drunkard. Just when Pierre snatched at and
struck up the pistol Makar Alexeevich at last got his fingers on the
trigger, there was a deafening report, and all were enveloped in a
Forgetting his intention of concealing his knowledge of French,
"You are not wounded?" he asked.
"I think not," answered the Frenchman, feeling himself over. "But
damaged plaster of the wall. "Who is that man?" said he, looking
"Oh, I am really in despair at what has occurred," said Pierre
rapidly, quite forgetting the part he had intended to play. "He is
The officer went up to Makar Alexeevich and took him by the collar.
Makar Alexeevich was standing with parted lips, swaying, as if about
him. "We French are merciful after victory, but we do not pardon
energetic gesture.
Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to hold
that drunken imbecile to account. The Frenchman listened in silence
a smile. For a few seconds he looked at him in silence. His handsome
face assumed a melodramatically gentle expression and he held out
his hand.
"You have saved my life. You are French," said he.
could perform a great deed, and to save his life--the life of M.
great deed.
But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer's conviction
based upon it, Pierre felt it necessary to disillusion him.
"I am Russian," he said quickly.
that presently. I am delighted to meet a compatriot. Well, and what
are we to do with this man?" he added, addressing himself to Pierre as
to a brother.
Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman, having once received that
loftiest of human appellations he could not renounce it, said the
officer's look and tone. In reply to his last question Pierre again
explained who Makar Alexeevich was and how just before their arrival
that drunken imbecile had seized the loaded pistol which they had
his arm.
it you. Lead that man away!" said he quickly and energetically, and
The soldiers in the yard, hearing the shot, came into the passage
"You will be called in when you are wanted," he said.
had time to visit the kitchen, came up to his officer.
he. "Shall I serve them up?"
"Yes, and some wine," answered the captain.
CHAPTER XXIX
When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter
again thought it his duty to assure him that he was not French and
wished to go away, but the officer would not hear of it. He was so
for saving his life that Pierre had not the heart to refuse, and sat
evidently not understanding how anyone could decline so flattering
an appellation, shrugged his shoulders and said that if Pierre
life.
Had this man been endowed with the slightest capacity for perceiving
the feelings of others, and had he at all understood what Pierre's
Pierre.
"A Frenchman or a Russian prince incognito," said the officer,
looking at Pierre's fine though dirty linen and at the ring on his
never forgets either an insult or a service. I offer you my
friendship. That is all I can say."
There was so much good nature and nobility (in the French sense of
the word) in the officer's voice, in the expression of his face and in
"Captain Ramballe, of the 13th Light Regiment, Chevalier of the
Legion of Honor for the affair on the seventh of September," he
introduced himself, a self-satisfied irrepressible smile puckering his
lips under his mustache. "Will you now be so good as to tell me with
the ambulance with that maniac's bullet in my body?"
Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and, blushing,
for concealing it, but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him.
"Oh, please!" said he. "I understand your reasons. You are an
officer... a superior officer perhaps. You have borne arms against us.
That's not my business. I owe you my life. That is enough for me. I am
a shade of inquiry in his tone. Pierre bent his head. "Your
Russian cellar and brought with them, Ramballe invited Pierre to share
his dinner, and himself began to eat greedily and quickly like a
healthy and hungry man, munching his food rapidly with his strong
Delicious!" His face grew red and was covered with perspiration.
orderly, brought some hot water in a saucepan and placed a bottle of
claret in it. He also brought a bottle of kvass, taken from the
kitchen for them to try. That beverage was already known to the French
had found in the kitchen. But as the captain had the wine they had
taken while passing through Moscow, he left the kvass to Morel and
applied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bottle up to
its neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and for
captain still more lively and he chatted incessantly all through
saving me from that maniac.... You see, I have bullets enough in my
body already. Here is one I got at Wagram" (he touched his side)
leg which as you see does not want to march, I got that on the seventh
deluge of fire was worth seeing. It was a tough job you set us
there, my word! You may be proud of it! And on my honor, in spite of
those who did not see it."
"I was there," said Pierre.
The great redoubt held out well, by my pipe!" continued the Frenchman.
thrown back like cardboard figures. Oh, it was beautiful, Monsieur
Pierre! Your grenadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them close
fellows! Our King of Naples, who knows what's what, cried 'Bravo!' Ha,
momentary pause. "So much the better, so much the better, Monsieur
smiled), "that's what the French are, Monsieur Pierre, aren't they?"
merrily at him. Probably the word "gallant" turned the captain's
thoughts to the state of Moscow.
Moscow? What a queer idea! What had they to be afraid of?"
it?" asked Pierre.
"Ha, ha, ha!" The Frenchman emitted a merry, sanguine chuckle,
patting Pierre on the shoulder. "What a thing to say!" he exclaimed.
"Paris?... But Paris, Paris..."
The captain looked at Pierre. He had a habit of stopping short in
the middle of his talk and gazing intently with his laughing, kindly
eyes.
that you were Parisian! You have that... I don't know what, that..."
"I have been in Paris. I spent years there," said Pierre.
Paris is a savage. You can tell a Parisian two leagues off. Paris is
he added quickly: "There is only one Paris in the world. You have been
to Paris and have remained Russian. Well, I don't esteem you the
Under the influence of the wine he had drunk, and after the days
he had spent alone with his depressing thoughts, Pierre
involuntarily enjoyed talking with this cheerful and good-natured man.
idea to go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army
is in Moscow. What a chance those girls have missed! Your peasants,
Warsaw, all the world's capitals.... We are feared, but we are
Pierre interrupted him.
"The Emperor," Pierre repeated, and his face suddenly became sad and
embarrassed, "is the Emperor...?"
"The Emperor? He is generosity, mercy, justice, order, genius-
that's what the Emperor is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so.... I
assure you I was his enemy eight years ago. My father was an
emigrant count.... But that man has vanquished me. He has taken hold
of me. I could not resist the sight of the grandeur and glory with
which he has covered France. When I understood what he wanted--when
I saw that he was preparing a bed of laurels for us, you know, I
there! Oh yes, mon cher, he is the greatest man of the ages past or
future."
The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled.
"No, he will make his entry tomorrow," he replied, and continued his
had come and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where the
the hussars did not understand what was said to them in French.
The captain had their senior sergeant called in, and in a stern
officer, and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters that
were already occupied. The German who knew little French, answered the
two first questions by giving the names of his regiment and of his
commanding officer, but in reply to the third question which he did
not understand said, introducing broken French into his own German,
knew German, translated what the German said to the captain and gave
elsewhere. The captain went out into the porch and gave some orders in
a loud voice.
before, with his head in his hands. His face expressed suffering. He
really was suffering at that moment. When the captain went out and
position he was in. It was not that Moscow had been taken or that
Painful as that was it was not that which tormented Pierre at the
ready. Napoleon was to enter the town next day. Pierre still
considered that it would be a useful and worthy action to slay the
evildoer, but now he felt that he would not do it. He did not know
intention. He struggled against the confession of his weakness but
dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his former gloomy
The captain returned to the room, limping slightly and whistling a
tune.
The Frenchman's chatter which had previously amused Pierre now
with which he twirled his mustache, all now seemed offensive. "I
feeling of weakness tied him to the spot; he wished to get up and go
The captain, on the other hand, seemed very cheerful. He paced up
and down the room twice. His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as
if he were smiling to himself at some amusing thought.
"The colonel of those Wurttembergers is delightful," he suddenly
said. "He's a German, but a nice fellow all the same.... But he's a
German." He sat down facing Pierre. "By the way, you know German,
then?"
Pierre looked at him in silence.
"Shelter?" Pierre repeated. "The German for shelter is Unterkunft."
"How do you say it?" the captain asked quickly and doubtfully.
"Onterkoff," said the captain and looked at Pierre for some
you think so, Monsieur Pierre?" he concluded.
we? Morel will warm us up another little bottle. Morel!" he called out
Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine. The captain looked at
and sympathy in his face, went up to Pierre and bent over him.
"There now, we're sad," said he, touching Pierre's hand. "Have I
upset you? No, really, have you anything against me?" he asked Pierre.
"Perhaps it's the state of affairs?"
Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially into the Frenchman's
eyes whose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him.
death. I say it with my hand on my heart!" said he, striking his
"Thank you," said Pierre.
that "shelter" was Unterkunft in German, and his face suddenly
brightened.
filling two glasses with wine.
table in a pensive attitude.
would have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons
in Moscow with him. I must tell you, mon cher," he continued in the
sad and measured tones of a man who intends to tell a long story,
And with a Frenchman's easy and naive frankness the captain told
manhood, and all about his relations and his financial and family
"But all that is only life's setting, the real thing is love-
love! Am I not right, Monsieur Pierre?" said he, growing animated.
"Another glass?"
Pierre again emptied his glass and poured himself out a third.
There were very many of these, as one could easily believe,
love stories had the sensual character which Frenchmen regard as the
special charm and poetry of love, yet he told his story with such
sincere conviction that he alone had experienced and known all the
charm of love and he described women so alluringly that Pierre
listened to him with curiosity.
